Barry Lather (born August 16, 1966 in Albany, New York) is an American Director, Choreographer, Producer, Dancer and Singer.


== Early life ==
Barry Lather grew up in Atlanta, Georgia and was raised in a dancing family of five children.  His mother, Joan, was a dance instructor and father, George, ran a dancewear business.  Barry moved to Los Angeles after high school and trained on scholarship at Joe Tremaine's Dance Center.


== Choreographic career ==
In 1985 Lather got his start in the entertainment industry dancing in the 3-D film Captain EO (featuring Michael Jackson and directed by Francis Ford Coppola). He went on to dance in various commercials, the TV series "Fame" and "Dancin' to the Hits", a TV special working with Kenny Ortega and Janet Jackson's music videos "Nasty" and "When I Think of You" in 1986, both choreographed by Paula Abdul.
Shortly after those videos, Lather was given the opportunity to choreograph for Janet Jackson on the American Music Awards and Grammy Awards in 1987.  Following the success of those two performances, Lather then choreographed Janet Jackson's music video "The Pleasure Principle", winning a Billboard Music Award and an MTV Award for Best Choreography in a video.  The following year, Lather won a second Billboard Award for choreography with Sting's video "We'll Be Together".  He went on to choreograph multiple commercials, TV performances and videos for Michael Jackson, Prince, Debbie Gibson, Paula Abdul, Sting, George Michael, Sheena Easton, Troop, Shanice Wilson, Sheryl Crow, Bryan Adams, a short film for Michael Jackson, "Ghosts", in 1996, and several television shows such as The Drew Carey Show and Nickelodeon's critically acclaimed show "Roundhouse".  He has received two American Choreography Awards, "Bob Fosse" Awards for his choreographic work.
Lather choreographed the Super Bowl Halftime Special in 1998 featuring Motown artists Boyz II Men, Queen Latifah, Smokey Robinson and The Temptations, the prestigious Academy Awards in 1996, Grammy Awards, MTV Awards, Billboard Awards, BET Awards and American Music Awards. His choreographic film credits include: Robin Williams and Edward Norton in Death to Smoochy, directed by Danny DeVito; and spectacular production numbers in Blues Brothers 2000, directed by John Landis, and the films "Vegas Vacation", "Super Mario Bros" and "Unconditional Love".  Lather received an Emmy Nomination for Outstanding Choreography for the Miss America Pageant in 2000, featuring Donny Osmond.
While choreographing, Lather also recorded an album as a solo artist with the label Atlantic Records/WEA in 1990, titled Turn Me Loose.  Releasing the single and music video, "Love in the Third Degree" directed by Peter Kagen.


== Productions directed ==
Since the late 1990s, Lather has directed many large productions adding onto his director/choreographer career, directing world tours and live television performances for Usher, P.Diddy, Mariah Carey, Rihanna, Carrie Underwood, Ciara, Pussycat Dolls, Miguel, Trey Songz, Sean Kingston, Ashlee Simpson, Pharrell, Gwen Stefani, and Seal.  He also was creative consultant on Britney Spears' "Dream within a Dream" world tour, working along with director Wade Robson.  Lather was creative director for Usher's Showtime special One Night, One Star, broadcast live from Puerto Rico; Usher's "The Truth Tour" in 2005, and Usher and James Brown's performance on the 2005 Grammy Awards.
Lather has also choreographed several ice show productions that have toured the globe, working with Olympic gold medalists Kristi Yamaguchi, Brian Boitano, Katarina Witt, and Scott Hamilton.  He has directed and choreographed theme park shows for Paramount Parks, Disney, EuroDisney in Paris and large productions for cruise ships as well.
In 2006, Lather directed Mariah Carey's tour The Adventures of Mimi, a major contribution to her successful comeback.  Lather co-directed pop superstar Rihanna's European Tour (which opened in Paris in November 2007) and two Dancing with the Stars live arena tour productions.
In the summer of 2008, Lather was creative director for Usher's opening performance on the BET Awards, as well as Rihanna's performance of "Take a Bow".
Later in 2008, Lather directed and choreographed Donny and Marie Osmond's hit Las Vegas Show at the Flamingo Hotel, and directed Rihanna's opening performance of "Vogue" on the "Fashion Rocks" TV special, Rihanna's rock-inspired American Music Awards Performance in Los Angeles and the Royal Variety TV special in London.
In 2010, Lather directed Usher's performance on the hit show "So You Think You Can Dance", Britain's Got Talent, X Factor, 2010 BET Award performance, 2010 American Music Awards and the dynamic MTV Video Music Awards performance in Los Angeles. Lather worked with Keri Hilson, Sean Kingston, Estelle, The Dream, Jason DeRulo, and directed and  choreographed the innovative Freestyle Motocross theatrical show "Nuclear Cowboyz" that toured the States in 2011 and 2012.  Lather directed Usher's epic "OMG" World Tour in 2010-2011, Usher's Grammy Award performance joined with Justin Bieber, R&B artist Miguel on the BET Awards and his fall Tour, Nicole Scherzinger's TV performances on American Idol, Ellen and So You Think You Can Dance.  In 2011, Lather directed and choreographed production performances on the Country Music Awards and a CMA Christmas TV Special and directed Usher and Romeo Santos performance on the Latin Grammy Awards in Las Vegas.  November 2011, Lather directed Justin Bieber's live American Music Awards performance of the single, "Mistletoe".


== Recent projects ==
In 2012, Lather's choreography was seen on the ABC show called DUETS with John Legend, Kelly Clarkson, Robin Thicke and Jennifer Nettles.  After DUETS, he directed legendary rocker John Fogerty's Canadian Tour and Miguel's Tour promoting his second album Kaleidoscope Dream.  He directed Ciara's VH1 Divas performance in Los Angeles December 2012.
In 2013, Lather directed Demi Lovato's live TV performances on Jimmy Kimmel and Dancing with the Stars, as well as Miguel's TV performances on Saturday Night Live, The Grammy Awards performance with Wiz Khalifa, Letterman, Leno, Jimmy Fallon, Jimmy Kimmel, The Soul Train Awards, Good Morning America and the BET Awards with Kendrick Lamar.  Lather directed Miguel's Tour who was out traveling with Drake...and John Fogerty's fall Tour of 2013.  November 2013, Lather choreographed the CMA Christmas TV special for the 3rd consecutive year.
Early 2014, Lather creative directed live performances for Ciara....as well as Miguel, whose production toured with Bruno Mars in Australia.  Lather then creative directed performances on the Kid's Choice Awards for artists American Authors, Aloe Blacc and Todrick Hall...as well as the BET Awards August Alsina and Trey Songz performance.
Later in the same year, Lather directed Mariah Carey's The Elusive Chanteuse Tour for Asia and Australia, and John Fogerty's acclaimed 1969 Canadian Tour.  The 2014 CMA Awards opening performance with Kenny Chesney and the CMA Christmas TV special were recent works.....as well as the Halo Awards for Nickelodeon creative directing performances for artist Echosmith, Nick Jonas, The Vamps, and Meghan Trainor.
In 2015, Lather directed Trey Songz "Between the Sheets" tour, creative directed performances for Nick Jonas and 5 Seconds of Summer on the 2015 Kid's Choice Awards, designed Ciara's Jackie Tour, launched John Fogerty's 2015 tour production and directed Carrie Underwood's CMT, CMA and American Music Award performances. 
Early 2016, Lather directed Carrie Underwood's The Storyteller Tour-"Stories in the Round" that sold out all over the US....a massive production with a 360 degree stage design and a unique live show experience!  On the Grammy's 2016, Lather directed Carrie Underwood and Sam Hunt's live mash up performance of "Heartbeat" and "Take Your Time"...as well as Carrie's American Idol Finale Performance, the ACM's, ACCA's, and CMT award performances of "Church Bells".
He directed Female Vocalist of the Year, Carrie Underwood's rocking "Dirty Laundry" performance on the 2016 CMA Awards.
The Storyteller Tour of Carrie Underwood's received a Pollstar Nomination for "Most Creative Stage Production" for 2016.  
2017, Lather directed and choreographed Paula Abdul's The Total Package Tour, as well as directed Trey Songz BET Award performance.
Early 2018, Barry directed the ground breaking entertainment Qiddiya project in Saudi Arabia.....and television performances for Carrie Underwood on the ACM awards, CMT awards, Radio Disney, IHeart, AMA & CMA awards.....as well as an emotional performance by Logic on MTV's VMA awards.  
The Straight Up Tour was launched by Barry in the fall, once again teaming up with Paula Abdul for a visual immersive production blending dance and content together.  
Most recently, Barry directed superstar artist Robbie Williams Las Vegas residency show at The Wynn, Carrie Underwood's in the round tour- The Cry Pretty Tour 360, was Creative Producer for the Finale Show of American Idol 2019, directed a special Nu Skin live corporate event, a grand opening ceremony in Saudi Arabia for the King and Crowned Prince called "Diriyah", and directed a Celebrity Cruise Line classic rock production called "Rockumentary" that launched June of 2021 in Greece.  
WWW.BARRYLATHER.COM 


== References ==


== External links ==
Barry Lather at IMDb
Barry Lather on MSN
Barry Lather at YahooTV