Tatjana Olujić (Serbian: Татјана Олујић) is a Serbian violinist and university professor. She is a Professor at Faculty of Music Art in Belgrade having studied violin with the Professor Andre Gertler and the chamber music with the Maestro Van Den Doorn in Belgium.


== Education and background ==
Olujić took her graduate master's degree with the Professor G. Octore, and also attended for developing her skills, the Yehudi Menuhin International Academy in Gstaad, Switzerland. She has been the winner of many international awards and acknowledgements including: the First Special Prize for Violin at the Royal Conservatory in Brussels, Belgium; the First Special Prize for Chamber Music with the Japanese pianist Umene Megumi. She has performed extensively at many international seminaries and for many years she won the Diploma of Béla Bartók in Budapest, “Franc List” in Weimar, the International School in Goslar (Germany), Estoril (Portugal).
She spent three years as the professor of violin at the Royal Academy of Music in Brussels, having afterwards become the member of the chamber solo group in Switzerland “Camerata Lysy Gstaad” that works under the auspices of Yehudi Menuhin. She has had performances all over the old and the new Yugoslavia, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Hungary, Russia, Rumania, Germany, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Cyprus, Bulgaria, USA (Carnegie Hall, Dag Hammarskjöld the UN Hall – New York), Taiwan, in the countries of Central and Latin America and Africa as well as she has done broadcasting and TV performances either. She has recorded five LP albums and three CD. For two years she was a concert master of the National Symphony Orchestra and the Professor at the National Conservatory of Music, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, where she ran her own private school of violin.
For four years she was leading the string orchestra “Kamerata Beograd” with students of the Faculty of Music Art being mainly its members. Since 1981 she has been teaching violin at the Faculty of Music Art in Belgrade while as from 1988 she works in capacity of a docent, and as from 1999 in capacity of a Visiting Professor. Besides her 23 years pedagogic experience at the highest level of musical institutions, for years she is in charge of summer and winter international seminaries for violin in Honduras (San Pedro Sula), Vrnjacka Banja, Zabljak, Belgrade, Prohor Pcinjski Monastery. Ever since September 1995 she has established permanent Violin Musical Workshop in the House of Djuro Jaksic in Belgrade, which she ran until July 1997 and as from September 1997 to 2000 it continues its work in the Roman Hall of the city library. From 2001 to 2002 she has been engaged as the Professor at the Private Fine Arts Academy.


== References ==
Pedeset godina Fakulteta muzičke umetnosti (Muzičke akademije) 1937–1987  (1988), Univerzitet umetnosti u Beogradu, Beograd
Pro Musica, No. 79-80 (1975), Udruženje muzičkih umetnika Srbije, Beograd


== External links ==
Official website