Asad Amanat Ali Khan 
(Urdu: اسَد امانت علی خان;  
25 September 1955 – 8 April 2007) was a popular classical, semi-classical and ghazal singer from Pakistan. Hailing from Patiala Gharana, Asad was son of musician Ustad Amanat Ali Khan. Asad Amanat Ali Khan died relatively young of a heart attack on 8 April 2007 in London.


== Early life and background ==
Asad Amanat Ali Khan was born in Lahore, Pakistan. His great-grandfather, Ali Baksh Khan, was the founder of Patiala Gharana. His grandfather, Akhtar Hussain, was a musician. Amanat Ali Khan, Asad's father, died in 1974. Asad was only 19 years old when his father died. His uncle Bade Fateh Ali Khan taught him music and trained him as if he was his own son. Bade Fateh Ali Khan also encouraged him to become a singing duo with his youngest brother Hamid Ali Khan.Asad's younger brother Shafqat Amanat Ali Khan is a pop and classical singer. He was the lead singer of the Pakistani music band Fuzön.


== Singing career ==
When he was 10 years old, Asad recorded his first song, which featured on his grandfather's debut album. He had also been interested in academics and often said if not a singer, he would love to be a pilot. He joined a private institution, however, and began singing professionally after completing his F.A. He started his musical career performing "thumri". One of the songs that featured in almost every concert he performed was "Insha Ji Utho" (originally sung by his father).Asad worked for Pakistan Television for several years. Nisar Bazmi, composer and PTV producer, who died one week before him, gave him his first break, introducing the artist to the world on television.
Asad also sang as a member of the very successful singing duo with his youngest uncle Hamid Ali Khan in the late 1970s and 1980s. Other than music and the family name, Asad inherited from his father a passion to act in films. But the affair was cut short after an unsuccessful attempt.


== Death ==
He had visited London in January 2007 and was receiving treatment for a condition known as Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. He returned to Pakistan during his treatment to receive the President's award of Pride of Performance. However, after receiving the award, he had left Pakistan on 3 April 2007 for medical consultation, and while in England, on 8 April 2007, he died in Cassiobury Park in London whilst enjoying an outing with the family.


== Discography ==
Some of his most well known songs are as follows:

Awaz Who Jado sa (Saheli)
Insha Ji Utho 
Ghar Wapis Jab Aaoge Tum
Umraan Langiyaan
Pyaar Nahii Hai Sur Se Jisko
Abhi Kalion Mein
Diyaar Yaar Geya
Doob Gai Sub
Ghum Tera Hum Ne
Jo Bhi Dil Ki
Kal Chowdhwein Ki Raat
Zara zara dil meiN dard huaa
Apne haathoN kii lakiiroN meiN
Piya dekhan ko tarseiN morey
Hum Pyar Ke Deewane (Film – Naqshe Qadam)
Kisi aur gham meiN itni khalish-e-nihaN nahiN hai (lyrics: Mustafa Zaidi)
Ek lamha-e-wisal tha wapas na aa saka ( Poet: Raees Warsi )
Youn bhi tou raas rooh ko tanhai aa gaaee ( Poet: Raees Warsi )
Boht mushkil palat kr dekhna tha (Poet: Faisal Hanif)
Hasti meri mera nizam (Poet: Muhammad Iqbal)
Kachi jai tand teri yaari c
Main nay kaha aayey (duet with Irum Hassan)
Ankhain ghazal hain ap ki (lolly wood song)


== See also ==
Patiala Gharana
Ali Baksh Jarnail
Akhtar Hussain
Amanat Ali Khan
Bade Fateh Ali Khan
Shafqat Amanat Ali Khan


== References ==


== External links ==
Asad Amanat Ali Khan at IMDb