Lorin Ashton, better known under his stage name Bassnectar, is an American DJ and record producer.


== Biography ==
Ashton grew up in the San Francisco Bay Area and initially identified with visual arts rather than music, creating movies with his dad's camera at the age of ten. When he was 16 years old, he played in a death metal band named Pale Existence, which contributed to his heavy style of music. In the following years, he became increasingly more involved in the scene, promoting shows, distributing food and assistance to concertgoers, buying records and eventually learning to DJ after studying electronic music production. He began creating music in the 1990s, using Opcode Systems Studio Vision Pro. In the mid-1990s, he briefly toured with Exhumed as a bass player.Bassnectar played house parties in the San Francisco Bay Area and began gaining momentum at Burning Man, often playing up to 7 sets a night. He released his first album in 2001 and performed as Bassnectar for the first time in 2002. He was previously known as DJ Lorin.On July 3, 2020, Bassnectar announced that he was "stepping back" from music, amid allegations of sexual misconduct that had been disseminated on social media. He denied the most recent allegations as being "untrue", albeit admitting that "some of my past actions have caused pain, and I am deeply sorry."


== Tours and live performances ==
Bassnectar performs regularly at a variety of music festivals, including Bonnaroo, Camp Bisco, Coachella, Electric Daisy Carnival, Electric Forest Festival, Lollapalooza, Okeechobee Music & Arts Festival, Life is Beautiful Festival, Oregon Eclipse, Wakarusa. In 2012, Bassnectar sold over 250,000 tickets, not including festivals.Bassnectar finished in fourth place in the 2013 America's Best DJ competition conducted by DJ Times magazine and Pioneer DJ.In 2015, Bassnectar stopped touring and shifted focus playing the festival circuit, and curating his own events. One such event, named 'Deja Voom'. took place from February 27 through March 2, 2019 at the Barcelo Maya Resort in Riviera Maya, Mexico. Deja Voom hosted artists across five stages: Pool Party, Beach Stage, Deja Room, Voom Room, and The Oasis. These spaces brought different sub genres of electronic bass music to cater to a variety of music tastes.


== Sexual abuse allegations ==
On July 3, 2020, Bassnectar announced that he was "stepping back" from music, amid allegations of sexual misconduct and Child grooming that had been disseminated on social media through the Instagram account @evidenceagainstbassnectar. The allegations have been supported by some of Bassnectar's past female collaborators. According to Rolling Stone the allegations resurfaced in response to a statement he made on Twitter on June 30, 2020 where he said his"own romantic relationships and interactions have been positive, consensual, legal and loving.” In his statement, Bassnectar also denied more recent allegations as being "untrue", albeit admitting that "some of my past actions have caused pain, and I am deeply sorry."On April 5, 2021, Bassnectar along with the management companies Amorphous Music, Inc., Bassnectar Touring, Inc., Redlight Management, Inc., C3 Presents, L.L.C, and Interactive Giving Fund, were sued by two women identified in the lawsuit as "Rachel" and "Alexis", for emotional distress and medical expenses. The women allege that Bassnectar and the management companies engaged in a human trafficking scheme, and that Bassnectar manufactured and possessed child pornography of themselves. According to the lawsuit, the women allegedly met Bassnectar through social media.  An attorney for Bassnectar denied the allegations in the lawsuit.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsMotions of Mutation (2003)
Diverse Systems of Throb (2004)
Mesmerizing The Ultra (2005)
Underground Communication (2007)
Cozza Frenzy (2009)
Divergent Spectrum (2011)
Vava Voom (2012)
Noise vs. Beauty (2014)
Into the Sun (2015)
Unlimited (2016)
All Colors (2020)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website