David Alexander De Horne Rowntree (born 8 May 1964) is an English musician, politician, solicitor, and animator.  He is the drummer for the rock band Blur and is a councillor in Norfolk County Council, representing the Labour Party.


== Early life ==
Born in Colchester, Essex, Rowntree was born to musical parents – Susan, a viola player, and John, a sound engineer at the BBC. He has an older sister named Sara. He attended the Gilberd School, Colchester during the week, and the Landermere Music School, Thorpe-le-Soken, at weekends, where he studied percussion. He played percussion with his father in the Colchester Silver Band, a brass band. After leaving school he studied for a Higher National Diploma (HND) in Computer Science at Thames Polytechnic, and started his career as a computer programmer for Colchester Borough Council.


== Career ==
Rowntree had played in bands with Graham Coxon while the two were growing up in Colchester, and knew Coxon's father who taught jazz classes at Landermere. In 1989, Coxon introduced Rowntree to Damon Albarn, who was forming a band around Goldsmiths, University of London. Rowntree was asked to join, and left his job to move to London. With the addition of Alex James, and after two name changes, the band settled on Blur and were signed to Food Records, which was distributed through EMI.  EMI later acquired Food Records and Blur were absorbed into EMI.
On 31 July 2018, Rowntree appeared in the video for Slaves' newly-released single, "Chokehold", as a drummer auditioning for a part in the band.Rowntree is a computer animator, and owns an animation company called Nanomation. He directed two series of the South Park-esque animated show Empire Square, which made its TV debut on Channel 4 on 18 February 2005. He is interested in computer graphics and has contributed to three research papers on topics related to non-photorealistic rendering.Rowntree trained to become a solicitor when Blur took a hiatus in 2006. He is employed in the criminal department of Kingsley Napley, a firm of solicitors based in Farringdon, central London.He was a presenter for Global Radio's alternative rock radio station XFM (now Radio X) in the UK and hosts a regular show on Sunday nights from 9pm to 11pm.On November 2021 Dave Rowntree signed to an indie label for his debut album.
The 'Parklife' group's drummer has inked a deal with Cooking Vinyl for his first solo record, which is due out in 2022.


== Politics ==
Rowntree has been a keen activist and supporter of the Labour Party since becoming a member in 2002, and has been chairman of London's West End branch. In April 2007 he unsuccessfully contested the safe Conservative seat of Marylebone High Street on Westminster City Council. In July 2008, he fought the Labour-held seat of Church Street, a Labour stronghold since its creation in the 1960s, but a swing from Labour to the Conservatives of 14.1% meant that he was again unsuccessful, as the Conservatives gained the seat.
In February 2008, he was selected by the Cities of London and Westminster Constituency Labour Party to stand against Conservative MP Mark Field at the 2010 General Election. He was defeated at that election. In 2011, Rowntree sought selection as Labour candidate for Norwich South; he lost to Clive Lewis, a journalist and former soldier, who went on to be elected as MP.
Rowntree supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq and in 2007 said, "I'm not a pacifist, I do believe that some things are worth fighting for, and dying for. I understand that that's easier to say, I'm not being the one who's asked to die, but Saddam was such an illegal ruthless bastard I didn't shed any tears for it [the war]."Rowntree is a committed opponent of the death penalty and patron of Amicus, an organisation that provides legal representation to those on death row in the United States.
In August 2014, Rowntree was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to The Guardian opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September's referendum on that issue.In the Norfolk County Council election on 4 May 2017, he was elected as county councillor for the University division in Norwich.


== Other interests ==
He has campaigned against prosecution of internet music filesharers, and is a member of the Advisory Council of the Open Rights Group, a United Kingdom-based digital rights NGO. When asked on Blur's website how he felt about their single "Out of Time" being leaked on the Internet before its release, he replied "I'd rather it gushed".Rowntree obtained a full pilot's licence in 1995.
Rowntree holds a foundation licence for amateur radio in the UK since 2012 using the callsign M6DRQ. 
He upgraded his licence in 2016 to advanced with the new call sign 2E0DVR.Rowntree is a founding director of the Featured Artists Coalition.


== Personal life ==
In 1994, Rowntree married Paola, a Canadian woman. The couple divorced in the early 2000s. In 2007, he was dating Michelle de Vries.In the early 1990s, Rowntree was a heavy drinker; he stopped drinking alcohol in 1993 after a particularly heavy drinking session with members of the band Siouxsie and the Banshees. However, several years later, he began a cocaine habit. This led to a public incident in 2003 when, during a TV interview of Blur for MuchMusic by Canadian journalist Nardwuar the Human Serviette, Rowntree was seen mocking and physically intimidating Nardwuar throughout the interview. Rowntree has apologised several times since for his behaviour, saying that "the day after a cocaine binge I'd sometimes fly into a murderous rage," and that this was the case on that day. By 2007, he stated that he had stopped using drugs and was "active in the recovery community". He keeps a clip of the interview on his phone, to watch if he ever considers relapsing into drug use.


== References ==


== External links ==
BBC appearance discussing poverty
Rowntree discusses why he became a Labour candidate
Equipment spec
Time Out interview May 2007
Nanomation - Rowntree's animation company
Dave Rowntree at IMDb