Hilary Shepard (born Hilary Shapiro on December 10, 1959), alternately billed as Hilary Shepard-Turner, is an American actress and singer. She began her career in the mid 1980s, as co-lead singer and percussionist in the girl group American Girls, before rising to fame as actress in the films: Summer Lovers (1982), Weekend Pass (1984), Private Resort (1985), Radioactive Dreams (1985), Tough Guys (1986), Hunk (1987), Lucky Stiff (1988), Troop Beverly Hills (1989), Peacemaker (1990), Scanner Cop (1994), Theodore Rex (1996), Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie (1997), Addams Family Reunion (1998), The 40-Year-Old Virgin (2005), Going Shopping (2005) and Paradox (2018).
She has also starred in other projects including Star Trek: Deep Space Nine and Power Rangers Turbo. She has appeared as a guest star in several television series as The Golden Girls, Full House, Roswell, So Little Time, Crossing Jordan and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation.


== Biography ==
Shepard was born in New York City, New York. In the mid 1980s, Shepard was a co-lead singer and percussionist in the short-lived all-female group American Girls. American Girls originally started as a film project, which fizzled. After some personnel changes and more rehearsing, the band sustained many comparisons to the Go-Go's, who were popular at the time as well assigned to the same label, IRS Records. However, American Girls featured veterans of the all-women band scene including Brie Howard who had played drums for Fanny and Miiko Watanabe who played bass with the Screamin' Sirens. They recorded one album only, which was intended as a demo but was pressed to vinyl in its original form. The eponymous debut album was released in March 1986.  The cover shows the band in a hotel room, with alcohol, a deck of cards, and a copy of The National Enquirer. The video for their single "American Girl" received some airplay on MTV. Their song "Androgynous" appeared in the 1986 film Tough Guys and the song "American Girl" appeared on the soundtrack for Out of Bounds.  They also opened for The Lords of the New Church on 1986 tour dates.When that group ended, she moved into acting, appearing in numerous motion picture and television series.


== Career ==
In 1990, she acted in the movie Peacemaker alongside Robert Forster.
In 1992, she guest-starred in two episodes of Full House's sixth season as KFLH D.J. Julie in "Radio Days" and "Lovers And Other Tanners". In 1994, she played Zena in the film Scanner Cop. In 1996, she portrayed two characters on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine: the Benzite ensign Hoya in “The Ship” and the genetically enhanced Lauren in "Statistical Probabilities" and "Chrysalis". The same year, she acted in the movie Theodore Rex starring Whoopi Goldberg. Though originally intended for theatrical release, the film went direct-to-video, and consequently became the most expensive direct-to-video film ever made at the time of its release.Shepard may be best known for her recurring role as the evil pirate queen, Divatox, in the Power Rangers franchise, starting with Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie. During the first half of the Power Rangers Turbo season, Shepard was replaced by actress Carol Hoyt in the role of Divatox while she was on maternity leave. In 1998, she starred in the TV movie Addams Family Reunion, alongside Tim Curry, Daryl Hannah, Haylie Duff and Ed Begley Jr. Only released on VHS and LaserDisc, the film has never been released on DVD.Shepard portrayed the lead villain, the chain-smoking Virginia Svelte, in Jurgen Vsych's Ophelia Learns to Swim.'
In 2005, she took part in the blockbuster The 40-Year-Old Virgin starring Steve Carell, Paul Rudd and Seth Rogen. It received positive reviews from critics, with Carell being highlighted for his performance, and grossed over $177 million worldwide on a $26 million budget. He won accolades from the Golden Schmoes Awards and MTV Movie & TV Awards for this role while Keener received awards from the Boston Society of Film Critics and Los Angeles Film Critics Association. The 40-Year-Old Virgin was named by the American Film Institute one of 2005's Top 10 Films for "[introducing] the world to a new leading man of laughter — Steve Carell." The same year, she appeared in the romantic film Going Shopping.
In 2016, she acted in the TV movie A Husband for Christmas, alongside Eric Roberts, Vivica A. Fox and Jackée Harry.In 2017, she was cast in the short movie The Order, alongside other former Power Rangers cast members.In 2018, she acted in the Netflix musical film Paradox starring Neil Young and Willie Nelson.


== Others ==
Shepard and actress Daryl Hannah co-created two board games, "Love It or Hate It" and "LIEbrary," the latter having been previewed by Hannah on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in December 2005.


== References ==


== External links ==
Hilary Shepard at IMDb
Hilary Shepard at AllMovie
Hilary Shepard on Twitter