Victoria Jane Asher (born January 20, 1988) is an American musician. She was the keytarist of Cobra Starship until their split in November 2015, and is currently recording as a solo artist under the name Vicky-T.


== Early life ==
Asher is the daughter of Peter Asher, of British pop duo Peter and Gordon, and Wendy Asher (née Worth), who formerly worked in the film business, but is now a well-known art collector and curator. She is the niece of British actress Jane Asher. Asher attended high school with artist Shwayze and photographer Lauren Dukoff.
She attended New York University (NYU) to study film. During her time there, she worked for directors Michel Gondry and Terry Gilliam. She assisted on music videos like The White Stripes' "The Denial Twist" and Kanye West's "Heard 'Em Say", on television commercials for Nespresso featuring George Clooney, and on feature films The Science of Sleep and Be Kind Rewind. After finishing school, she worked on the film A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints for a summer with Robert Downey Jr., who is a personal friend.
In 2006, Gabe Saporta, searching for female keyboardists in New York City, discovered her on MySpace. She subsequently took a leave of absence from university to join Cobra Starship, at the age of 18. She eventually graduated from NYU.


== Musical career ==
In 2007, she and her Cobra Starship bandmates went on the Fall Out Boy-headlined Honda Civic Tour, along with +44, The Academy Is..., and Paul Wall. She provided vocals in place of Carol Heller on +44's song "Make You Smile".In August 2007, a rumor went around that she, Fall Out Boy frontman Patrick Stump, and Ashlee Simpson collaborated on a song on Asher's Myspace. Supposedly, Stump played bass and drums, and Simpson helped Asher with the lyrics. However, this rumor was proven false, with Asher claiming that it was all a huge misunderstanding. During the Honda Civic Tour, Stump taught Asher how to use GarageBand, which presumably helped her create the song. In the end, Asher made it clear in a blog entry on her Myspace page that she "just didn't want to leave anyone without credit".Cobra Starship took a break from touring, and Asher used the free time to work for the company TCG Studios, making main title sequences. She filmed and developed the opening title sequence for both Orange Is the New Black, with director Thomas Cobb, and the opening title sequences for Bitten, Homeland, Satisfaction, and more. She also directed the music videos for Guilty Pleasure: Home Video, and "Kiss My Sass", along with many other music videos/online content created for the band while touring.
Asher's other musical projects include a band called Optimo, which she formed with friends in Los Angeles, and a brief side project with Frank Staniszewski (keyboardist of Big City Rock) called NotInTown.
Now a solo artist, Asher still writes her own music, blogs, and creates tour footage montages. She self-released her first single, "Protect This Love", in March 2016. Nine months later, her second single, "Push Comes to Shove", a collaboration with Jon Walker, was uploaded onto her YouTube channel, and released on iTunes the next day.In 2016, she created the company Muted Color, as a way to release her own music and to create video content.
Through Muted Color, she released "Clouds" (2017), "Turn It Low" (2017), "Ghost" (2017), "Another Word for Paradise" (2017), "Kryptonite" (2019), "Hollow" (2019), and her four-track EP, Feeling Myself Without You (2019).Later in 2018, she teamed up with her boyfriend Trent Culkin to take over Muted Color and make it into a production company and artist collective.
In 2019, Victoria brought on Helena Hawkes, whom she met while working at Blumhouse Productions. Victoria, Helena, and Trent will be announcing the new and improved Muted Color in 2020.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website