John D'earth (born March 30, 1950) is an American post-bop/hard bop jazz trumpeter born in Framingham, Massachusetts who has appeared on recordings by Dave Matthews and Bruce Hornsby as well as recording a number of CDs on his own. He currently resides in Charlottesville, Virginia.


== Early ==
John Edward Dearth II was born in 1950 in Framingham, Massachusetts, growing up in nearby Holliston. His father had survived the Pacific theater of World War II and was "obsessed" with jazz. As D'earth says, "He was a maniac for music and for jazz music. He was my first teacher. He revealed to me mysteries of art and music that are priceless."His father would blast his records throughout the night, driving the family crazy. He would also sit with his two-year-old son, teaching him to play drum brushes on a metal tray. His father was "drawn to the complexities of be-bop" with its raw rhythms and stylings. "He hated white bands that were corny and tight," D'earth states. "Those were prejudices too, and I learned some of those prejudices early on."The Dearth family lived in a house from the 1690s that had been The Littlefield Tavern during the Colonial era. D'earth's parents divorced when he was eight, around the time he got his first trumpet. He immediately walked out into the yard and played it to the trees, discovering scales on his own.Louis Armstrong and His Hot Five were D'earth's favorite band, but he also appreciated classical music. Jazz instruction wasn't so easy to find in the early 1960s, but D'earth crossed paths with Henry "Boots" Mussulli, who was a veteran of the big band days.This Sicilian alto saxophone player and arranger had opened the Sons of Italy Crystal Room, a speakeasy that presented acts like Count Basie and Roy Eldridge in nearby Milford. He was part of a group of jazz instructors who helped form Berklee College of Music.One day Mussulli sat a young D'earth next to him and called a friend and simply said, "Listen." He and D'earth began improvising on the Charlie Parker be-pop classic "Confirmation". When done, Mussulli picked the receiver and said, "Fourteen" — then hung up. That experience changed D'earth's life, confirming his musical gift. As a teenager, DownBeat said of his performance at the Newport Jazz Festival that he played "like a young Freddie Hubbard."On Mussulli's impact D'earth says:
What he taught me about professionalism and what it is to really know your stuff ... to be uncompromising with yourself about it ... I learned that from him, and everything unfolds from there. You've got to know two things in jazz: Tell your story and don't copy people.
D'earth met Robert Jospé, a jazz drummer who would later relocate to Charlottesville and become a UVA music instructor, in 1967 at The Cambridge School of Weston, a preparatory high school near Boston. They started a group named Fire and Ice, and "began a collaboration that continues today."D'earth added the apostrophe to his name later in life.


== Career ==
D'earth attended Harvard University briefly only to drop out and pursue his musical career. In his early years he played in Bob Moses' innovative bands. He co-founded the group Cosmology (Vanguard Records) with bandmates drummer Robert Jospe and singer Dawn Thompson — whom D'earth later married. Jospé, D'earth, and Thompson, whom he met in New York, came to Charlottesville in 1981 for a summer and have all lived there ever since. Before heading for The Big Apple, Thompson had helped found the famed Prism Coffeehouse musical venue in Charlottesville.D'earth is the Director of Jazz Performance at the University of Virginia as well as the artist in residence at Virginia Commonwealth University. D`earth was music teacher at The Tandem School in Charlottesville from the early to mid-1980s. He influenced many of his students while also teaching them to step out of their comfort zones and experience many musical styles they wouldn't have otherwise.He plays Thursday nights in downtown Charlottesville at Miller's with other musicians including JC Kuhl, Pete Spaar, Jamal Millner, Devonne Harris, Pureum Jin, Brian Caputo, Wells Hanley, Adam Larrabee, Brian Jones, and many others. He plays at Fellini's No. 9 first Saturdays monthly with Devonne Harris (drums), Bob Hallahan (piano), and Pete Spaar (upright bass).
In addition to being a prominent jazz figure in Charlottesville, John can be found making frequent appearances with younger up-and-coming players as well as older mainstay musicians alike in the Richmond, Virginia area. D'earth is known for his work with musicians such as Miles Davis, Buddy Rich, Dave Matthews Band, and Emily Remler.


== Discography ==
Solo
On (Cosmology, 2013)
Yo, Susannah
What Woody Do (Adam's Vamp)
Prelude II
Outside Insight
Market
Goodbye Secret King (for LeRoi Moore)
Lady on a Train
We Shall See
Water Is The Blood of EarthJohn D'earth - trumpet, flugelhorn
Pete Spaar - bass
Wells Hanley - piano
Devonne Harris - drums
J.C. Kuhl - tenor saxophoneRestoration Comedy (Double-Time, 2000)
John D'earth - trumpet, composer, producer
Howard Curtis - drums
Mike Richmond - upright bass
Mulgrew Miller - piano
Jerry Bergonzi - saxThursday Night Live at Millers (Cosmology, 1998)
John D'earth - trumpet
Dawn Thompson - vocals
Jeff Decker and Bobby Read - saxophones
Jamal Millner - guitar
Wells Hanley - piano
Pete Spaar - upright bass
Robert Jospé - drums
guest Doug Bethel - trombone
produced by Greg HowardOne Bright Glance (Enja, 1990)
John D'earth - trumpet, composer
John Abercrombie - guitar, guitar synthesizer
Marc Johnson - bass
Howard Curtis - drums
Steve Gaboury - producer, engineerWith Thompson D'earth
When the Serpent Flies (Cosmology, 2006)
Dawn Thompson - vocals
John D'earth - trumpet and flugelhorn
J.C. Kuhl - tenor saxophone
Jamal Millner - guitar
Daniel Clarke - piano
Pete Spaar - double bass
Brian Caputo - drums
produced by Greg HowardMercury (Cosmology, 2001)
Dawn Thompson - vocals
John D'Earth - trumpet
Carter Beauford - drums
Dave Matthews - vocals
Jamal Millner - guitar
Bobby Read - sax
Wells Hanley - piano
Pete Spaar - upright bass
produced by Greg Howard


=== As sideman ===
With Ray Anderson

Big Band Record (Gramavision, 1994) with the George Gruntz Concert Jazz BandWith Emily Remler

Transitions (Concord Records, 1983)
Catwalk (Concord, 1985)


== Honors, awards, distinctions ==
D'earth appears in The Biographical Encyclopedia of Jazz on pages 175–76.


== Personal ==
D'earth appeared regularly with his vocalist wife Dawn Thompson, who died August 31, 2017 after surviving nine years with brain cancer. She was born in Alexandria, Virginia on October 9, 1946.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to John D'earth at Wikimedia Commons
John D'earth at the University of Virginia
John D'earth biography, discography and album reviews, credits & releases at AllMusic
Web Archive of Thompson D'earth Band official webpage.