John Alexander McGeoch (25 August 1955 – 4 March 2004) was a British musician who played with as a guitarist with several bands of the post-punk era, including Magazine, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Visage, and Public Image Ltd.
He has been described as one of the most influential guitarists of his generation. In 1996 he was listed by Mojo in their "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time" for his work on the Siouxsie and the Banshees song "Spellbound". Signature characteristics of his playing style included inventive arpeggios, string harmonics, the uses of flanger and an occasional disregard for conventional scales.
Peer Johnny Marr from the Smiths said: "Really my generation was all about a guy called John McGeoch, from Siouxsie and the Banshees". Musician and producer Steve Albini praised McGeoch for his guitar playing with Magazine and Siouxsie and the Banshees, qualifying as "great choral swells, great scratches and buzzes, great dissonant noise and great squealy death noise. What a guy" and further commenting: "anybody can make notes. There's no trick. What is a trick and a good one is to make a guitar do things that don't sound like a guitar at all. The point here is stretching the boundaries". Peer John Frusciante praised him as a musician "who played in more textural ways" and who made "interesting music".  Frusciante "bought an SG, because I’m a big fan of John McGeoch from Siouxsie and the Banshees and Magazine. When I’d play along with his records using a Strat, the parts sounded too thin and weak for the simple power of his playing. In learning the SG, I had to teach myself to bend in a brand-new way and use new muscles to do vibrato". Peer Ed O'Brien of Radiohead bought a Yamaha SG saying "it’s so great to play.... been playing some of my favourite Siouxsie and the Banshees riffs on it. John McGeoch was the guitarist at the time of my favourite Banshees albums... the man responsible for some of the greatest riffs ever .. Spellbound, Christine, Happy House to name a few. [...] his riffs are so elegant and once you learn how to play them there is almost a zen like quality to the sound and movement of your hands. it reminds me of the beauty in Johnny Marr’s playing".


== Early life ==
McGeoch was born on 25 August 1955 in Greenock, Renfrewshire, Scotland, where he spent his childhood years. He began to play the guitar at 12 years of age, first learning British blues music, being influenced by the work of Eric Clapton, and also that of Jimi Hendrix. He took piano lessons for five years until the age of twelve. When his parents bought him a guitar, he stopped piano. In 1970 he played with a local band called the 'Slugband'. In 1971 his parents moved to London.
In 1975 he went to Art school in Manchester where he received a degree in Fine Art. In his final year in 1976, he was enraptured by a new music that "ended up being called punk rock". He qualified it "the revolution, and I really do think that's the right word for it". He maintained an interest in photography, painting and drawing throughout his life.


== Career ==


=== Magazine, and Visage ===
In April 1977 McGeoch's Manchester student flatmate Malcolm Garrett introduced him to Howard Devoto, who had recently left the Buzzcocks and was looking for a guitarist to form a band with. The pair formed a new act entitled Magazine, along with Barry Adamson, Bob Dickinson and Martin Jackson. The new band released its debut single, "Shot by Both Sides" in January 1978. The song's music was written by Pete Shelley with new Devoto lyrics (the Buzzcocks version was titled "Lipstick"); on release it reached #41 on the UK Singles Chart. (The same year McGeoch graduated from Manchester Polytechnic) .
McGeoch went on to play on Magazine's first three albums, Real Life (1978), Secondhand Daylight (1979) and The Correct Use of Soap (1980). He left the band in 1980 shortly after the release of the latter album, frustrated with its lack of commercial success despite its recognition with music press critics.
In 1979, while still a member of Magazine, McGeoch joined Steve Strange's electronic band Visage along with erstwhile Magazine bandmates Adamson and Dave Formula, recording songs for their first single "Tar" and later, in 1980, for their eponymous album Visage, McGeoch playing guitar and saxophone on the record.
Although he saw Visage as something of a joke, the band provided McGeoch with early professional credibility and success. The band's single "Fade to Grey" went to #1 in a number of European countries. McGeoch did not record on the group's second album, The Anvil, as it was recorded in London and he was unable to participate.
While still a member of Magazine and Visage, McGeoch also worked occasionally with other bands. In mid-1980 he recorded most of the guitar work on Gen X's album Kiss Me Deadly at AIR Studios in London. In September 1980 he guested with the Skids for a Peel Session, standing in for Stuart Adamson who was unwell. He also collaborated with ex-Magazine drummer John Doyle on Ken Lockie's album The Impossible (1981). Around this time, he left Magazine.


=== Siouxsie and the Banshees ===
When recording with Siouxsie and the Banshees in early 1980, McGeoch entered a period of both creative and commercial success. During his first session with the Banshees he began a new style of playing. He later commented: "I was going through a picky phase, as opposed to strumming. "Happy House" was lighter and had more musicality in it. They invited me to join. I was sad leaving Magazine but the Banshees were so interesting and it felt like a good move". He became an official member of the group at the release of "Israel" in November 1980, which was the first single he composed with the band.

He recorded guitar on the Banshees' long-players Kaleidoscope (1980), Juju (1981) and A Kiss in the Dreamhouse (1982). The Banshees' hit singles of this era featured some of McGeoch's most acclaimed work, particularly 1980's "Happy House", "Christine" and "Israel", and 1981's "Spellbound" and "Arabian Knights". McGeoch's contribution to the band was important in terms of sounds and style. Singer Siouxsie Sioux later said: John McGeoch was my favourite guitarist of all time. He was into sound in an almost abstract way. I loved the fact that I could say, "I want this to sound like a horse falling off a cliff", and he would know exactly what I meant. He was easily, without a shadow of a doubt, the most creative guitarist the Banshees ever had". However, McGeoch suffered a nervous breakdown due to the stresses of touring and an increasing personal problem with alcohol, and after collapsing on stage during a performance at a gig in Madrid, left the band in October 1982.


=== Armoury Show, Public Image Ltd and other collaborations ===
In 1983, during a break from playing music, he produced Swedish punk-funk band Zzzang Tumb's debut long-player.He joined the band the Armoury Show which included Doyle as well as ex-Skids members Richard Jobson and Russell Webb. Their album Waiting for the Floods released in 1985, features some of McGeoch's best guitar work. He contributed to former Bauhaus singer Peter Murphy's debut solo long-player Should the World Fail to Fall Apart.In 1986, McGeoch joined John Lydon's Public Image Ltd, a decision which may have been partly motivated by financial difficulties he was in at this time. He had been an admirer of PiL, particularly of Lydon's song-lyrics, yet reportedly had previously turned down an offer from him to join the band in 1984. Despite being struck in the face with a bottle thrown from the crowd during one of his first gigs with the band, McGeoch remained with PiL until it disbanded in 1992, making him the longest-serving member apart from Lydon. He recorded on its long-players: Happy?, 9 and That What Is Not’'.
In 1992 he was invited by the Icelandic band the Sugarcubes to play the guitar track on the song "Gold" for their Stick Around for Joy long-player. In early 1990s, without a band, he ended his career seeking to form one via a variety of short-lived ventures, including working with Glenn Gregory and the songwriter/producer Keith Lowndes. With John Keeble of Spandau Ballet and vocalist Clive Farrington of When in Rome, he formed a line-up provisionally titled 'Pacific', but no commercial material came of it.
In the mid-1990s McGeoch retired from professional music and trained mid-life as a nurse/carer. In the early 2000s he was reported as attempting to re-enter professional music by working on musical scores for television productions.


== Legacy ==
McGeoch has been cited by many guitarists as a major influence. Johnny Marr from the Smiths said: "When I was in my teens, there weren't many new guitar players who were interesting and of their time.[...] John McGeoch. [His work] was really innovative guitar music which was pretty hard to find back then. To a young guitar player like myself, those early Banshees singles were just class". Simon Goddard wrote that McGeoch was a "significant inspiration" on Marr.Radiohead's Ed O'Brien cited him as a "big influence", citing him as one of the "great guitarists, but they weren’t lead guitarists". Radiohead were also inspired by McGeoch to record "There There". They explained that they were "in heaven" when their producer Nigel Godrich made Jonny Greenwood sound like Siouxsie and the Banshees-era McGeoch for that session. U2's The Edge has cited McGeoch as an influence and chose the Siouxsie and the Banshees song "Christine" for a compilation made for Mojo. When he was interviewed in March 1987, The Edge stated: "My background is much more Tom Verlaine and John McGeoch".Other guitarists also mentioned him. Dave Navarro of Jane's Addiction said that he learned to play guitar by listening to the albums McGeoch recorded with Siouxsie and the Banshees. John Frusciante of Red Hot Chili Peppers named McGeoch in his primary influences: "[McGeoch] is such a guitarist I aspire to be. He has a new brilliant idea for each song. I usually play on the stuff he does on Magazine's albums and Siouxsie & the Banshees's like Juju". In a playlist, William Reid of the Jesus and Mary Chain selected  two McGeoch's songs, "Spellbound" by the Banshees and "Definitive Gaze" by Magazine. Mark Arm of Mudhoney "loved [McGeoch's] work with Magazine and Siouxsie And The Banshees". James Graham of the Twilight Sad cited him as one "of the guitarists I still continue to revisit when I’m writing. The ideas they were coming up with at the time still sound as fresh just now as they did back then".In 2008, the BBC aired an hour-long radio documentary on McGeoch's life and work, titled Spellbound: The John McGeoch Story.


== Equipment ==
During his time with Magazine McGeoch played a Yamaha SG1000 guitar with a stand-mounted MXR M117R flanger. He bought his first model in 1977 when the band signed its recording deal, which provided him with the finances for professional standard equipment. Whilst with Siouxsie and the Banshees he created his own setup, involving an MXR flanger mounted on a mic stand which allowed him to hit a chord and sweep the flange knob in real time. Whilst working with 'The Armoury Show', he also used a Squier 1957 Stratocaster and an Ibanez AE410BK. During his work with PiL, and in his last years he favoured a solid wood Carvin electric guitar. He also used a Washburn Tour 24 guitar for touring during 1988.


== Personal life ==
On 9 September 1981, McGeoch married Janet Pickford, his girlfriend at Manchester Polytechnic, the marriage later ending in divorce. On 14 September 1988, he married Denise Dakin, the second marriage producing a daughter, Emily Jean McGeoch (b. 1989).


== Death ==
McGeoch died at the age of 48 in his sleep on 4 March 2004 at his home in Launceston, Cornwall.


=== Tribute ===
Banshees' drummer Budgie wrote a text to honour him on the Siouxsie website, saying: "Without any disrespect to all the other guitarists we have worked with, none had the relaxed mastery and such a depth of expression as John McGeoch. No amount of scrutiny of filmed 'Live' performance tapes could reveal the subtle economy of technique that made an apparently complex phrase look so deceptively simple. Exasperated guitarists would often comment, "But his hands don’t even move!".


== Discography ==
MagazineReal Life (1978)
Secondhand Daylight (1979)
The Correct Use of Soap (1980)VisageVisage (1980)Gen XKiss Me Deadly (1981)Siouxsie and the BansheesKaleidoscope (1980)
Juju (1981)
A Kiss in the Dreamhouse (1982)The Armoury ShowWaiting for the Floods (1985)Peter MurphyShould the World Fail to Fall Apart (1986)Public Image LtdHappy? (1987)
9 (1989)
That What Is Not (1992)The SugarcubesStick Around for Joy (1992)


== See also ==
John Doyle
Slik
Russell Webb


== Bibliography ==
Sullivan-Burke, Rory (April 2022). The Light Pours Out of Me: The Authorised Biography of John McGeoch. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1913172664.


== References ==


== External links ==
Fodderstompf.Com: John McGeoch Biography
John McGeoch MySpace Account (set up by his daughter)
Profile of John McGeoch from shotbybothsides.com
Interview with John McGeoch from shotbybothsides.com
Interview with John McGeoch and Richard Jobson of Armoury Show