Hazel Pascual Reyes-Almarinez (born May 9, 1979) is a Filipina actress, singer, endorser, and entrepreneur. She is known by her stage name Ara Mina, which she derived from the first names of two of her younger sisters. The eldest of 9 siblings, she grew up in Marikina with her mother, Francis Marie Klenk, and stepfather, Romeo Reyes. Her biological father is former politician Chuck Mathay. Hazel or Ara has a daughter named Amanda Gabrielle with Bulakan, Bulacan Mayor Patrick Meneses. She also has two step-daughters, the daughter’s of Dave Almarinez, Kirsten Almarinez and Klane.


== Career ==
Ara Mina became part of the Philippine entertainment industry at 14 years of age via the youth-oriented program That's Entertainment, hosted and spearheaded by the late master showman German Moreno ("Kuya Germs"). Since then, Ara has starred in about 40 television shows and 60 movies and released 3 recording albums. She won her first acting award for Best Actress for the movie Mano Po at the Metro Manila Film Festival in 2002. The following year (2003), she received 3 more Best Actress awards from Manila Film Festival, FAMAS and Golden Screen Awards for the movie Ang Huling Birhen Sa Lupa. She also won the Golden Screen Awards and Star Awards in 2004 for Best Supporting Actress in a drama in the Philippines for her role as Luna in Minsan Pa.
Ara also sings aside from acting. Her self-titled and first album from Star Music (formerly Star records) which carried the hit song "Ay, Ay, Ay, Pag-Ibig" received a gold record award a few months after its release. Because of this, the record label decided to produce another album for her entitled "Heavenly", which was also a big hit and included the track "Oops Teka Lang" which was also the theme song of the movie of the same title starring Robin Padilla and Claudine Barretto from Star Cinema. Her version of the Rey Valera hit "Kung Kailangan Mo Ako" was also used as the theme song of the ABS-CBN miniseries Sa Sandaling Kailangan Mo Ako. In 2008, she produced her 3rd album which was released under Sony BMG. It consisted of acoustic covers of hit songs like "What Do We Mean To Each Other" by Sergio Mendes, "Somebody" by Depeche Mode, and "Very Special Love" by Maureen McGovern.
Ara won the hearts of the members of the press because of her excellence in getting along with people. She has won several "Darling of the Press" citations in her 24 years in the industry.
She truly showcased versatility by starring in television shows of different genres, from sitcoms to heavy drama. Super Klenk , her first television sitcom wherein she played a super heroine, showed her comic skills and agility. She was then included in the cast of "Bubble Gang", which was her longest stint for television. The character that she played in the TV series Mulawin, Vultra, is also remarkable. In 2007, she switched to freelance acting and transferred to ABS-CBN doing projects via Prinsesa ng Banyera and Ligaw na Bulaklak. She returned to GMA Network and did multiple teleseryes for over two years. From 2011-2016, she did stints with TV5 Network but was able to do shows with the Kapuso network through Teen Gen and Yesterday's Bride. Her most recent television stint was for GMA-7's Pinulot Ka Lang sa Lupa and was also part of the movie My Ex and Whys starring Enrique Gil and Liza Soberano. She staged a teleserye comeback on ABS-CBN in Araw Gabi after doing anthology roles with the channel.
With all her achievements and success, she added another feather in her cap when she launched her very own skin care line, Ara's Secret in 2012. The brand continues to gain trust and following among Filipinas all over the world. In February 2017, she opened Hazelberry Cafe in Quezon City, which offers comfort food, great coffee, and her very own pastries and baked goods.


== Personal life ==
Ara was raised by her mother Francis and stepfather Romeo. At 18, she met and was acknowledged by her biological father, Chuck Mathay, a former politician from the Philippines. Actress Cristine Reyes is her half-sister.
On December 17, 2014, Ara Mina gave birth to a baby girl whom she named Amanda Gabrielle, her child with Bulakan mayor, Patrick Meneses.On January 13, 2021, she got engaged to Dave Almarinez, CEO of the Philippine International Trading Corporation.Ara supports children with birth defects through the Ara Mina Foundation, which she founded in 2007. Her youngest sibling, Mina Princess Klenk, born with Down syndrome, was the inspiration behind this cause.


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


=== Film ===


== Awards ==


=== Discography ===
Ara Mina (Self-Titled) (1999, Star Music)
Heavenly (2001, Star Music)


== References ==


== External links ==
Ara Mina at IMDb
Ara Mina at iGMA.tv