Guy Eckstine is an A&R executive, artist manager, record producer, and new media executive who has produced and executive produced over 40 records. Four albums that Eckstine has produced or executive produced have won Grammy Awards, including The New Standard by Herbie Hancock.


== Biography ==
The son of singer, bandleader and 2019 Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winner, Billy Eckstine, Guy Eckstine is currently president of Iconique Music Group. Throughout his four-decade career, Eckstine has worked in a variety of executive positions in the music industry as SVP Creative Development, MP3.com; SVP A&R, Savoy Label Group, VP A&R, Verve Records; Director A&R, Columbia Records; and Creative Manager, Virgin Music Publishing.  From 2013-2016 Eckstine was a two-time elected member of The Recording Academy (NARAS), board of governors, NY Chapter.


== 2007–2020 – Iconique Music Group ==
2020, Iconique Music Group signs 16 year old pop singer, Liv Hanna, for artist management and creative development services and co-produced tracks with Paul Pesco and Joe “Legacy” Lindsay. Iconique Music Group management artists, The Claudettes, sign to 40 Below Records, and sign to booking agency Mongrel Music, releasing their new album, "High Times In The Dark," produced by Grammy winner, Ted Hutt. 
2019, Iconique Music Group signs Chicago based Indie roots artists, The Claudettes, to exclusive artist management representation.
2018, Iconique Music Group artists, House Of Waters and Tiempo Libre continue global touring with performances in Asia, North America and Europe. Scheduled for release in 2018 and 2019, Eckstine produces albums by House Of Waters, "Rising," country pop artist, Danielle Johnson; and pop/jazz singer/songwriter, Chloe Bee. Brooklyn based progressive rockers, Ellis Ashbrook release the Eckstine produced recording, 'The Space Palace' (extended version). Iconique Music Group management clients, Sexy Dex and The Fresh (Fall 2018), and NYC based hip hop artist, Kay Real, 'The Zoned Out Mixtape' (Winter 2018), release debut EP's. Country/pop singer and songwriter, Danielle Johnson signs with booking agency, Kosson Talent for exclusive worldwide booking representation and releases her Eckstine produced debut single and video, "Let It Be You" from her eponymous debut EP (Fall 2018).
2017, Iconique Music Group signed NYC based hip hop artist, Kay Real, and New Orleans future funk band, Sexy Dex & The Fresh, for global management representation, and began the creative development of Grammy Choir member, 17 year old singer/songwriter, Chloe Bee. House of Waters performed a sold-out tour of Europe supporting Snarky Puppy, and signed to The Kurland Agency for exclusive worldwide booking agency representation with USA Tour scheduled for Spring and Summer 2017.
2016, Iconique Music Group management clients, House of Waters, sign to Ground Up/Verve Label Group/UMG with Eckstine serving as executive producer. The eponymous album reached #2 on the iTunes World Music Charts and the band touring in Europe and North America.  Eckstine Produced, "Night at the Speakeasy," by Svetlana and the Delancey 5 featuring, Wycliff Gordon on Origin Records. "Night At The Speakeasy" received several "Best of 2016" accolades including, "Jazz Vocal Album of the Year" from Classicalite.  Eckstine co-produced and mixed the 4th independent release by Brooklyn-based progressive rock band, Ellis Ashbrook. Iconique Music Group clients, Tiempo Libre began their world tour 2016 in Shanghai, China. Iconique Music Group creative development and artist management client, Danielle Johnson, continued her country pop collaborations with Nashville songwriters including, Phil Galdston, Jennifer Denmark, Tiffany Goff, Keesy Timmer, Bruce Wallace, Dave Brainard and others.
2015, Eckstine executive produced the eponymous #1 iTunes Jazz debut album by Twin Danger for Universal Music Classics/Decca Records. Iconique Music Group management clients, Tiempo Libre released, Panamericano on Universal Music Latin Entertainment, and began a world tour with stops in China, Turkey, UK, Canada, USA, Spain.  Tiempo Libre also premiered their Broadway bound musical, Cuba Libre, at the Winnigstad Theater in Portland, Oregon.  IMG artist, Lizzy Loeb makes her Broadway debut in Spring Awakening. IMG artist, Grant Davis stars in the indie movie, Something Like Summer.  IMG artist, Danielle Johnson began working in Nashville with hit songwriters, Dave Brainard, Jennifer Denmark, Bruce Wallace, Doug Johnson, Lacy Green, Keesy Timmer, Nick Autry, Rachel Farley and Michael Hunter Ochs.
2014, Iconique Music Group management and production clients, Tiempo Libre, Twin Danger, and Tony Succar: Unity – "The Latin Tribute to Michael Jackson, signed recording contracts to Universal Music Group. In 2014, he also added new clients, Lizzy Loeb, Danielle Johnson, and House of Waters to his IMG management roster.  Eckstine also produced, Night at The Speakeasy, by Svetlana and the Delancey Five.
2013, Eckstine signed and produced the debut recording by Capitol Music Group/Manhattan Records recording artist, 16-year-old singer, Grant Davis, and, Delta Devil Dreams by 19-year-old Scottish singer/guitarist, Eilidh McKellar. McKellar's debut, received numerous "Best of 2014" lists from BBC and Blues Magazines.
2012, Eckstine produced the full-length debut Wait 'Til We're Young by Southern California indie rock band, The Bolts  (aka, Island Apollo) including their debut ep, Fall, for the Bolts Broadcasting Co.
2011, Eckstine became the sole owner of Iconique Music Group.
2010, Eckstine executive produced, and signed ConJazzNess, to Universal Music Group/EmArcy recording artist, Nailah Porter.
2008–2009, Eckstine co-produced the debut of Nashville-based singer/songwriter Justyna Kelley, Over The Moon, with producers, David Kershenbaum and Kevin Killen.
2007, Eckstine co-founded Iconique Music Group with music and television executive, Scott Barkham, securing a recording contract with Concord Music Group for UK jazz/funk band, Incognito, and managing recording artists, The Pimps of Joytime, and Sasha Dobson, among others.


== 1975–1988 – early music career ==
After attending UCLA as an Ethnomusicology Major and John Bergamo's percussion program at California Institute of the Arts, Eckstine began his music career in Los Angeles as a session musician playing drums for Quincy Jones, Michael McDonald, Eddy Grant, Michael Henderson, James Ingram, and Herbie Hancock, among others. Eckstine is also a founding member of the progressive rock band Soma, featuring guitarist Allan Holdsworth, bassist, Tony Levin, guitarist, David Shawn Waldroop, and keyboardist/composer, Mark Gleed.


== 1988–1998 – executive A&R career – Virgin Music in America, Columbia Records, Verve Records ==
Eckstine's executive music business career began in 1988 at Virgin Music Publishing.  As Creative Manager at Virgin Music, Eckstine pitched and secured songwriter covers for Virgin's stable of songwriters, including songs for Whitney Houston, Vanessa Williams, and Kool and the Gang.  Shortly thereafter in 1989, Eckstine was hired as Director of A&R at Columbia Records, working with Terence Trent d'Arby, Shawn Smith (lead singer of Brad/Satchel), Regina Belle, Movement Ex, Lenny Hamilton Jr., Planet Z, and Philip Bailey.
Relocating to New York City in July 1991, Eckstine joined Verve Records as VP/Head of A&R, leading the label to 6 consecutive years (1991–1997) as Billboard Magazine #1 Jazz Label in the world, at which he signed and produced/executive produced Grammy winning recordings by Herbie Hancock, and Wayne Shorter, as well as signing, and producing records by  Chris Botti, Jeff Lorber, Art Porter, Gino Vannelli, Pete Belasco, Peter Delano, Evan Marks, and Roy Hargrove, among others. Eckstine also executive produced the Frank Zappa tribute album, Zappa's Universe, which received a Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance.


== 1999–2001 – new media pioneer – MP3.com ==
Based in Los Angeles, in 1999, Eckstine became SVP/Creative Development, for the original online music service provider, MP3.com, providing artist development expertise on the MP3.com "Music and Technology Tour" featuring, Alanis Morissette, Tori Amos, Christina Aguilera, and TLC. Eckstine was originally hired as Genre Manager for Classical, Jazz and World Music, as well as editor-in-chief and moderator for online content.


== 2001–2006 – independent producer – Atlantic Records, WB Records, Savoy Label Group, Fox TV, CBS TV ==
Post MP3.com, Eckstine independently produced records including the chart-topping Billboard Jazz release, Nice and Slow, by Brian Culbertson, (WB) (2002), A Charlie Brown Christmas, by Cyrus Chestnut and Friends, (Atlantic Records, 2003), which featured Brian McKnight, Vanessa L. Williams, The Manhattan Transfer, and Pat Martino, among others. Eckstine  also secured a recording contract with Atlantic Records for UK singer, Julia Fordham. In 2004 as SVP/A&R for Savoy Label Group, Eckstine produced Moondance, by flautist, Hubert Laws, which featured, Herbie Hancock, Chris Botti, and Brian Culbertson, and he also secured a recording contract for Canadian jazz singer, Carol Welsman.  In the indie label realm Eckstine produced and performed on the debut album, Styrofoam, by Alexandra Scott, (1999).  In 2002, Eckstine produced San Diego hip hop/funk jazz combo, "Spaceman Spiff," In 2005 Eckstine produced, performed and co-wrote the debut, We Like Supermodels of Southern California-based indie rock group, "Feels Like Friday." Eckstine also scored music for TV and Film, including the Fox Television series T.R.A.X., (2001), directed by Renny Harlin, and the television commercials for CBS, "Courting Alex," starring Jenna Elfman, (2006), and TV/commercial music for the drug Avodart, (2006).


== 2005–2007 – MIAATV.com ==
Relocating to New York City in October 2005, Eckstine became the Co-founder/CEO of MIAATV.com- Music Industry Television. In addition to acquiring talent and personally interviewing over 250 artist and music industry legends for MIAATV.com, including artists Quincy Jones, Stevie Wonder, Phil Ramone, Chris Botti, George Duke, Herman Leonard, Kenny "Babyface" Edmonds, Buddy Guy, Todd Rundgren, Garth Brooks, Steve Gadd, Omar Hakim, Sheila E, Paul Stanley, Glen Ballard, Patrick Moraz, Alan White, and Joss Stone, Eckstine negotiated and implemented strategic partnerships and affiliations with major brands such as Atlantic Records, Gibson Musical Instruments, Hal Leonard Music Publishing, A.E.S- Audio Engineering Society, M.I.T. – Musicians Institute, NAMM, IAJE, Mobile Music Now, Emergenza, and ASCAP.  In 2007, prior to launching the internet startup,  Eckstine abruptly resigned from MIAATV.com and co-founded Iconique Music Group with music and television executive, Scott Barkham.


== Board member/entertainment industry speaker ==
Over the course of his executive and professional career, Eckstine has been a speaker, panelist and moderator at entertainment industry conventions and events including, Digital Hollywood – Urban Summit 2012, AMCON 2010, IBS 2009, CMJ 2008, Digital Hollywood 2007, IAJE, (International Association Of Jazz Educators), the Radio and Records Convention, the Urban Network Convention, the Gavin Convention, and the L.A.S.S, – Los Angeles Songwriter Showcase. Eckstine has also been a guest lecturer at the Clive Davis Department of Recorded Music, Tisch School Of The Arts, at New York University, and lectured on the creative process, A&R, Record Production and Music Publishing at the UCLA Music Business Program, the CalArts Alumni Entertainment Group, and the University of Pittsburgh, Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences.
In 2011 and 2016, Eckstine was elected to The Board of Governors for The Recording Academy, NY Chapter.


== Discography ==
Selected discography (produced, executive produced, and A&R):

Herbie Hancock – The New Standard, (Verve) Dis Is Da Drum, (Mercury) The Essential Herbie Hancock, (Verve)
Wayne Shorter – High Life, (Verve Forecast)
Chris Botti – First Wish, (Verve Forecast) Midnight Without You, (Verve Forecast) Caught, (Verve Forecast) Best of Chris Botti, (GRP)
Gino Vannelli – Yonder Tree, (Verve Forecast) Slow Love, (Verve Forecast)
Brian Culbertson – Nice and Slow, (WB)
Jeff Lorber – Worth Waiting For, (Verve Forecast) West Side Stories, (Verve Forecast) State of Grace, (Verve Forecast) The Very Best of Jeff Lorber, (GRP)
Art Porter – Pocket City, (Verve Forecast) Straight to the Point, (Verve Forecast) Undercover, (Verve Forecast) Lay Your Hands on Me, (Verve Forecast) For Art's Sake, (Verve Forecast)
Cyrus Chestnut and Friends – A Charlie Brown Christmas, (Atlantic)
Peter Delano – Peter Delano, (Verve) Bite of the Apple, (Verve)
Pete Belasco – Get It Together, (Verve Forecast)
Tom Grant – In My Wildest Dreams, (Verve Forecast) The View From Here, (Verve Forecast) Hands, (Verve Forecast)
Evan Marks – Long Way Home, (Verve Forecast) Three Day Weekend, (Verve Forecast)
Hubert Laws – Moondance, (Savoy Jazz)
Alexandra Scott – Styrofoam, (Indie)
Feels Like Friday – We Like Supermodels, (Drugs)
Ricardo Silviera – Small World, (Verve Forecast)
Incognito – Inside Life, (Verve Forecast) Tribes, Vibes and Scribes, (Verve Forecast) Positivity, (Verve Forecast) Tales From The Beach, (Heads Up/Concord)
Julia Fordham Concrete Love, (Atlantic/Vanguard)
Sandra Small 5 – Small World, (Smallworld)
Spaceman Spiff – The Love EP (Indie)
Soma – Soma (Occidental)
Various artists – Zappa's Universe, (Verve)
Various Artists – Playboys – Playboys 40 Years Of Jazz (Verve)
Movement Ex – Movement Ex, (Columbia)
Justyna Kelley – Over The Moon (Indie)
Nailah Porter – ConJazzNess, (Universal/EmArcy)
The Bolts – Fall, and The Bolts, (Bolts Broadcasting Co.)
Grant Davis – Perfect Symphony, (Universal/Capitol Music Group/Manhattan)
Eilidh McKellar – Delta Devil Dreams, (Eilidh McKellar Music Ltd./Iconique Music Group)
Twin Danger – Twin Danger (Decca Records/Universal Music Classics)
Svetlana and the Delancey 5 – Night At The Speakeasy, Origin Records
House of Waters – House of Waters, Rising, (GroundUp Music/Verve Label Group)
Ellis Ashbrook - The Space Palace, (Independent)
Danielle Johnson - Danielle Johnson, (Danielle Johnson Music)


== Awards ==
Award-winning recordings and productions by Eckstine:

Grammy Award"The New Standard", "Dis Is Da Drum" – Herbie Hancock,
"Zappa's Universe" – various artists
"Highlife" – Wayne Shorter


== References ==

Billboard Magazine,
Hits Magazine,
Radio and Records Magazine,
Jazziz,
Downbeat,
Gavin Report,
Urban Network,
NARAS


== External links ==
Guy Eckstine at Allmusic
Guy Eckstine on LinkedIn
Guy Eckstine at Iconique Music Group