Cosmo Baker is an American, Philadelphia based DJ, record producer, and turntablist.
Baker grew up in Philadelphia, and is the younger brother of photographer Zoe Strauss. A lifelong music enthusiast, by the age of 16 he was DJing at many of the city's biggest nightclubs, as well as holding one of the original resident spots alongside King Britt at the legendary Back 2 Basics party. After graduating from high school, Cosmo moved to Brooklyn and began working at Eightball Records. During this time in New York he threw himself into the underground House music scene, surrounding himself with Frankie Knuckles, Little Louie Vega, David Morales and Armand Van Helden. At the same time, his diverse DJ sets quickly made him a fixture on the downtown scene alongside DJs like Mark Ronson and Stretch Armstrong. After moving back to Philadelphia in 1996 to continue his college studies, he soon started a party named The Remedy with fellow DJ Rich Medina. Lasting until 2003, this party was at the center of Philadelphia's burgeoning Neo soul community, frequently hosting luminaries of the scene such as The Roots and J Dilla.
By the early 2000s Baker had moved back to Brooklyn and helped form the collective known as The Rub: a classics and hip-hop party, as well as a DJ crew and remix collective. The Rub crew was instrumental in helping propel the Mashup craze as well as helping to legitimize the style of "open format" DJing, made most famous by Adam Goldstein aka DJ AM and the Hollertronix crew of Diplo and Low Budget. In 2012, Baker left the group in mid-2012 to pursue solo opportunities.
Baker frequently performs across The United States and Canada. He has also performed in Brazil, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Finland, Norway, Sweden, Russia, Denmark, Netherlands, England, Scotland, Germany, Belgium, France, Spain, Israel, United Arab Emirates, China, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, & New Zealand.
In January 2017, Baker was featured by Boiler Room alongside Matthew Law opening for DJ Jazzy Jeff.


== References ==


== External links ==
Montreal Mirror : Music : Cosmo Baker
Rub Radio
Cosmo Baker goes record shopping at Cal Sound in San Diego | DJ Cosmo Baker shops for electronic, hip-hop, reggae and a cappella records
SOUL STRUT : CRATE DIGGING DJ & HIP HOP (sub)CULTURE