Mathew Knowles (born January 9, 1952) is an American record executive, businessman and university lecturer. He is best known for being the manager of Destiny's Child. He also managed the beginning of solo careers of his daughters Beyoncé and Solange Knowles.
Knowles is the founder of Music World Entertainment, which embraces country, gospel and children's music. Thanks for his successes, Knowles is an active and longtime voting member of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS) and serves on its Grammy Board Committee.


== Early life ==
Knowles was born in Gadsden, Alabama, the son of Lou Helen Knowles (née Hogue) and Matthew Q. Knowles (April 4, 1927 – December 30, 1996). He is a 1974 graduate of Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, where he earned both a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics and a Bachelor of Science degree in Business Administration. He also has an MBA in Strategic Planning and Organizational Culture and an Honorary Phd in Business Administration from Cornerstone Christian Bible College, as well as a certificate in Ethical Leadership from Harvard University.


== Career ==
Knowles began his business career in sales of office and medical equipment. He moved to Houston in 1976 and worked for the Xerox Corporation for 10 years, primarily in the medical-systems sales division. Knowles worked selling CT/MRI diagnostic imaging equipment to hospitals and health facilities. He also worked in neurosurgical sales. In 1992, Knowles left this career to devote himself to his music company, Music World Entertainment, which he founded that year.Knowles established several recording imprints under Music World Entertainment, including Music World Gospel, Music World Kids, and Music World Country/Compadre. Knowles also established joint ventures with Sony Music, Interscope/Geffen/A&M, Fontana/Universal, Integrity Africa, Fontana International, and Sony Brazil.Knowles became manager of the vocal group Destiny's Child, working as either a producer or an executive producer on many of the group's projects. Under Music World Artist Management, Destiny's Child became a top-selling group, winning several awards including the Grammy Award, the American Music Award, BET Awards, and many others. Billboard magazine inducted the group into the All Time Hot 100 Artists. Knowles also managed the solo careers of Destiny's Child members Michelle Williams and Kelly Rowland. Former members LeToya Luckett and LaTavia Roberson once sued Knowles, accusing him of misappropriating group funds.
In 2002, Knowles founded Spirit Rising Music, which became Music World Gospel. Its artists include Vanessa Bell Armstrong, Brian Courtney Wilson, Micah Stampley, Juanita Bynum, Le'Andria Johnson, Amber Bullock, Andrea Helms, Trinitee 5:7, and Elder Goldwire. In 2016, through Music World Music, Knowles acquired the country music catalog Compadre, which includes Johnny Cash, Billy Joe Shaver, James McMurty, Trent Willmon, and Kate Campbell. Knowles also launched the family-oriented music imprint, Music World Kids. The label has released youth projects that include Baby Jamz, Krazy Kuzins, Kid's Rap Radio, and the Music World Kids CD 5-pack. The venture also has released music from Nickelodeon's popular cartoon series, Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!.
In addition to his work in music, Knowles is also one of the executive producers of the 2009 movie Obsessed, which stars Beyoncé. He is also executive producer of, and is featured in, two reality series: The UK's Chancers, and MTV International's Breaking From Above.
In October 2015, Mathew Knowles released his first book, "The DNA Of Achievers: 10 Traits of Highly Successful Professionals". In an interview with Madamenoire.com, he spoke about teaching entrepreneurship on the college level, and his entertainment industry seminar where he taught music executives like Van Benson and other successful students.  In March 2018, Knowles joined the advisory board of Tunedly, an online recording studio for songwriters.In July 2019, Knowles joined the cannabis and real-estate firm Bangi as its chief marketing officer.On October 25, 2019, Knowles announced via an Instagram video that he would release an album featuring then-unreleased music from Destiny's Child's childhood days as Girls Tyme. The album, Destiny's Child: The Untold Story Presents Girls Tyme,was released on all streaming platforms and the iTunes Store on December 2, 2019. The album's release was also accompanied by a book, Destiny's Child: The Untold Story, written by Knowles.In February 2021, Knowles launched his iHeartRadio podcast "Mathew Knowles Impact" and revealed his plans to retire from the music industry.


== Teaching ==
Knowles is a visiting professor at Texas Southern University, where he teaches courses on the entertainment industry in the School of Communications. In 2018, the university established the Mathew Knowles Institute in his honor. He currently holds a professorship at University of Houston, Prairie View A&M University, and the Art Institute.


== Accolades ==
Knowles is the recipient of the Century Award of Excellence (1911–2011) from the Omega Psi Phi fraternity. He also received the 2011 Living Legends Foundation Award and was named the "2007 International Executive of the Year" by the Greater Houston Partnership. Knowles is an active and longtime voting member of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS) and serves on its GRAMMY Board Committee. In 2011, he was appointed to the Board of Directors of the Gospel Music Association.


== Personal life ==
Knowles married Tina Knowles in 1980. She filed for divorce in 2009, dropped the matter in 2010, then refiled in August 2011, stating "discord or conflict of personalities" that prevented them from "reasonable expectation of reconciliation" as the reason. The divorce was finalized in November 2011.
On June 30, 2013, he married former model Gena Avery.In October 2019, Knowles announced he had been diagnosed with male breast cancer.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website