Zena McNally (born 8 March 1979) is an English radio presenter and one of the original members of girl-group Mis-Teeq. She left in early 2001, just before the group had real chart success. She featured on their first single and is also a solo singer. McNally co-presented the breakfast show on the BBC Radio 1Xtra alongside Trevor Nelson. McNally currently lives in the United States.


== Career ==
McNally started out as a backing dancer at the age of 16 in her hometown of Birmingham. After answering an audition, she became a member of the girl group Mis-Teeq, and they later had their first hit "Why" . Shortly after the release of "Why", McNally left the group with plans to embark on a solo career, signing a recording contract with Mercury Records.For the best part of a year, McNally was recording most of her debut album in Atlanta, Georgia.McNally released two singles from her debut album All of Me on Mercury Records. Her second single "Been Around the World" featured Vybz Kartel and Beenie Man.After releasing "Been Around the World", she was approached by Avex Records in Japan, who signed and released her debut album All Of Me in Japan and Southeast Asia in 2005, supported by the third single, "All Of Me". McNally then continued to work in Japan doing promotional work for the release of "All Of Me", which included supporting Beenie Man on Tour, and a national radio tour.In 2006, McNally presented her own entertainment show In The MIXX on Sky TV in the UK. She interviewed artists including The Game, Cassie, Ne-Yo and Akon, and actors ranging from Penélope Cruz to Denzel Washington.After leaving In The MIXX in 2007, McNally was approached by BBC Radio 1Xtra to co-present their new early morning breakfast show alongside Trevor Nelson.She also presented on Channel 4's web show Bite from 2007 to 2008. The show was shown every Tuesday on the Channel 4 website.


== Personal life ==
McNally's mother is Maltese. On 4 July 2008, McNally married the American international football player and current Chicago Fire Soccer Club player, Cory Gibbs, in a ceremony held in Miami, Florida. Shortly after their wedding, Gibbs was relocated to MLS Colorado Rapids soccer team, and McNally left the 1Xtra Breakfast Show and moved to the States with her husband. McNally divorced Cory Gibbs in 2014. She is now director of a property investment company, and works in entertainment management and artist branding in Los Angeles, CA.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===


== References ==