Martha Joy (Born Martha Joy Lim-Fiuza on December 8, 1990 in Toronto, Ontario) is a singer, recording artist and host in the Philippines.


== Career ==
Martha was born in 1990 in Toronto, Ontario of mixed Filipino and Portuguese parentage. She started singing almost as soon as she learned to speak. Her mother recognized her gift and sought the best available vocal coached in Toronto to ensure the proper development of her voice. Those years of formal training gave her not only the capacity to sing with ease but also the stamina required in a singing career. At her first solo concert in November 2007, Martha Joy sang 22 powerhouse songs at the Toronto Centre for the Arts. She currently specializes in classical crossover, R&B, and pop music.
Joy started winning trophies in singing competitions as a child. These include six First-place awards in the Kiwanis Music Festival. She has also performed in countless events in and outside Toronto. Among those she is most proud of are her solo performances before the United nations Global Peace Initiative in Geneva, Switzerland; The Mike Bullard Show on CTV; and of the singing of the Canadian national anthem for the Toronto Raptors game at the Air Canada Centre. She was only 11 years old when she wowed the 50 or so judges at the September 2003 Best New Talent Awards in L.A. at the Century Plaza Hotel. Out of hundreds of contestants, she won two separate categories: Best Contemporary Pop singer, and Best Child Broadway performer.
In 2007, Joy auditioned in Canada's reality TV show, Canadian Idol, and she was the youngest contestant to make it to the Top Ten Finals at the age of 16. Although she has many previous achievements to boost her credit, it was her success in the show that opened the door for her to seriously pursue a career in the music industry. In fact, in February 2008, she signed an exclusive recording contract with the entertainment company, Viva Records. In February 2009, her debut album, titled Martha Joy was released.
Joy can sing in several languages, including English, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and Tagalog.
Her first album was produced by Christian de Walden of Hollywood who had already created hits for Sarah Geronimo, Claire de la Fuente, Rachelle Ann Go and other Filipino talents. Her first single release is 'Dumating ka', which was composed by Jimmy Borja.
Joy has an all new originals line-up that also includes The Right Moment, Only My Heart, Broken, Holding on to a Dream, a duet with Jimmy Marquez, I Love the Sunshine, That's How it Has to Be, All of a Sudden, Pagka't Mahal Pa Rin Kita, This Special Night, Just Exactly Like We Planned, Maybe, Nothing More to Say, Do You Think of Me and Laging Ikaw.


== TV shows ==
Canadian Idol (season 5)
SOP Rules
Walang Tulugan with the Master Showman
KAOS


== Awards ==


== Discography ==
Martha Joy (2009)


== Recordings ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Canadian Idol page