George Lopez (born October 23, 1966), known by his stage name DJ Keoki or Keoki Franconi, is a Salvadoran-American electronic musician, among other genres, DJ. Born in El Salvador and raised in Hawaii, Keoki began advertising himself as "superstar" shortly after moving to New York City.


== Biography ==
Keoki Franconi was born in El Salvador but moved to Kihei, Maui, when he was 8.  After graduating from Kailua High School he moved to the mainland to study at an airline school in California. Franconi then enjoyed a brief career with several airline operations in New York City, among them the now defunct Trans World Airlines, while also being a busboy at the city's trendy Danceteria club.  It was at Danceteria that he got his start:

I kept bugging a nearby club's manager to, please, please, please let me DJ there. I told him I knew how to do it, even though I only had a small collection of records and one turntable at home.  He let me play a lounge gig on some of the slower nights. He told me to 'play whatever the fuck you want, so long as they stay,' words I've continued to live by to this day.


=== Club Kids and Michael Alig ===

While in New York, he met and began a romance with Michael Alig. Alig rose to international notability as the head of the Club Kids, a group of diverse partygoers who would dress in costumes each night and form parties in New York and all over the United States.
Dance music writer Jennifer Warner remembers,

I was marking the side of a mile-high stack of party invites with a huge purple pen and this body appeared, covered in silver glitter, wearing what looked like a diaper and dragging a boy [Michael Alig], also sporting a falling-off diaper, minus the glitter but made up like a clown.
While DJing at "Disco 2000", Alig's party night at the Limelight, Franconi was alleged to have passed out on the turntables while performing a set. He has completely denied the allegation, supposedly having stated: "I guarantee you that never fucking happened".


=== Superstar ===
Franconi had a successful career during the late 1990s and early 2000s as Superstar DJ Keoki; he released a number of CDs over that decade and was hired to play for thousands of people at massive raves. In 2006 and 2007, he toured – dressed extravagantly, wearing makeup, and sporting a number of tattoos – in the United States and Europe on the Club Party Monster Tour, a tribute to the film Party Monster (2003) as well as a nod to the Club Kid scene that shot him into stardom.
Keoki still tours and performs at venues such as The Viper Room in Los Angeles, California, Shag in Denver, Colorado, Tantra in Tampa, Florida [Club Tantra is permanently closed - updated 9-14-2020], VIA Afterhours in Houston, Texas, Amazura Concert Hall in Queens, New York, Hard Rock Cafe in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Level II in Scranton, Pennsylvania. He also makes annual appearances in Moscow at the Gaudi Fest during Halloween, and he has played at the Love Parade in Berlin, Germany. Presently he is signed to Moist Music and electronica mega-producer Edgar L. Montiels' (aka Decoding Jesus) indie electronica label, Let's Beat Milo Records, based out of Los Angeles. In January 2017, he was arrested in New York City after a man in his apartment died of a drug overdose, when the officers entering his apartment found it contained illegal narcotics. Following the incident, he entered a rehabilitation program and announced the cancellation of all of his upcoming events.


== Discography ==
1991 – DJ Keoki Presents Disco 2000 – Volume One (12")
1991 – DJ Keoki Presents Disco 2000 – Volume Two (12")
1993 – We Are One
1994 – Journeys By DJ
1995 – All Mixed Up
1996 – Disco Death Race 2000
1996 – The Transatlantic Move
1997 – Ego Trip
1998 – Inevitable Alien Nation
1998 – Altered Ego Trip (The Remix Album)
2000 – djmixed.com/keoki
2001 – Jealousy (also released in a Limited Edition 2XCD version with bonus CD w/ exclusive remixes)
2002 – Keokiclash
2002 – Misdirected Jealousy: The Remix Album
2003 – Kill The DJ
2004 – The Great Soundclash Swindle
2010 – Talking to Yourself
2019 – Born to Attack


== Depictions in popular media ==
He is written about in James St. James' book, Disco Bloodbath:James St. James (1999). Disco Bloodbath: A Fabulous But True Tale of Murder in Clubland (August 11, 1999 ed.). Simon & Schuster. p. 2222. ISBN 0-684-85764-2.
He is portrayed by Wilmer Valderrama in Party Monster (2003), a biopic about James St. James and Michael Alig
He was interviewed in Better Living Through Circuitry (1999), a documentary about electronic dance music culture
His song "Caterpillar" was featured in The Simpsons episode "Raging Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in 'The Curse of the Flying Hellfish'"


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City


== References ==


== External links ==
Superstar DJ Keoki on Myspace
Better Living Through Circuitry at IMDb
AllMusic - Biography
Www.patreon.com/keoki