Phillip Leslie Wilcher (born 16 March 1958) is an Australian pianist and classical music composer who was a founding member of the children's music group the Wiggles. When Wilcher published his first work, "Daybreak", at the age of 14, he was one of the youngest classical composers in Australia.
Wilcher has published over 100 piano-related works and has performed both solo and with ensembles. Rita Crews for The Studio Quarterly Magazine described his style as "free-flowing, with an underlying romantic character, one in which melodic line and lyricism are all-important elements". His music has been broadcast by radio stations ABC-FM and 2MBS-FM – the latter has aired two documentaries, Wilcher and the French Connection and Wilcher's World.


== Family and personal life ==
Phillip Leslie Wilcher was born to Naomi Joy Thompson (8 April 1929 – 21 June 2005) and Leslie James Wilcher (born 16 January 1923), a World War II veteran. Wilcher grew up in Camperdown. As of 2004, he resided in Concord and owns no cell phone, watch, or car: "My entire life since I was a boy was writing music and that has overshadowed everything.  I would be happy living in an oversized cardboard box with a piano and a blank sheet of manuscript paper".


== Career ==


=== Early years ===
Wilcher started piano lessons at the age of eight; his first teachers were Gladys Woodward and Jean Teasel.  His interest in composing music began at an early age, before his teens.  At the age of 14, Wilcher published his first piano composition, "Daybreak", with the Sydney-based music company, J. Albert & Son, making him the then-youngest published composer in Australia. The track was later recorded in 2006 by John Martin on his CD, Ancient Rivers.It was around that time Richard Gill awarded Wilcher a prize in the City of Sydney Eisteddfod for a work titled ‘Autumn Mists.’ Wilcher had entered it along with four other pieces, a Barcarolle, a Rhapsody, an Etude (which Gill praised as a “noble effort” that “rivaled Chopin’s Etude Opus 10 No. 4 in its ideas and difficulty”) and a smaller study he likened to the Opus 110 by Brahms, in both style and difficulty. In his autobiography 'Thinking Allowed' Wilcher recalls: "He was very kind to me, and encouraged me to continue on, suggesting – even foretelling – that mine was a name worth remembering."For seven years, after he published "Daybreak", Wilcher was a student of composer and musicologist, Franz Holford, who was an editor at J. Albert & Son; he later composed music with Holford for over twenty years. Wilcher's piano piece, "Autumn Rain", was published when he was 17, by J. Albert & Son. He also studied with classical musicians Neta Maughan and Elpis Liossatos, and began a thirty-year association with composer Miriam Hyde. Hyde is quoted as saying of Wilcher: "I find great satisfaction in the fact that we - Australia - have one composer who can succeed in a medium of sensitivity in spite of the ugliness and violence predominating in so many countries." In 1976 Wilcher became an assistant editor for J. Albert & Son's Classical/Educational Division. During the 1980s he worked for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).According to Wilcher's autobiography, it was while working at the ABC  Wilcher came into contact with American Pulitzer-Prize winning composer Ned Rorem, who was to prove a major influence upon Wilcher's way of thinking, and how he considered creativity one's primary purpose for being. As Rorem had once written Wilcher: "The meaning of Life is to seek Life's meaning." Although musically they are of different worlds, Wilcher considers Rorem a mentor. The two shared a correspondence spanning over 30 years. Rorem to Wilcher: "Meanwhile, get your work done, there are too few people who know (as you and I know) what they want to do and how to do it."


=== The Wiggles and children's music career ===
Early in 1991, while working in the Macquarie University early childhood music program, Wilcher met Anthony Field, former member of the Australian rock group the Cockroaches, who was studying child development. According to Wilcher, Field asked him to help them record their self-titled debut album.Wilcher claims that he "contributed the most musically to the debut album", composing 75% of the music. The album included another piece he had composed at 14, "Summer Dance", which appeared on the album as "Archie's Theme". Wilcher was nicknamed Archie due to his admiration of American pianist Liberace.  He performed in two of the group's videos, "Get Ready to Wiggle" and "Dorothy the Dinosaur".In 1992, Wilcher left the Wiggles. Their spokesperson, Dianna O'Neill, claims that he submitted a letter of resignation because he wanted to continue composing classical music. It was not until 26th November of 1992, that Wilcher signed a Consumer Affairs Statement of Change in Persons Document - Registration No: M09577-8 - sent him by Jeff Fatt. Jeff Fatt gives the release date as 6th July 1992, but due to house renovations he was involved in at that time, and despite repeated requests from Wilcher to Fatt, Fatt did not forward the document for signing to Wilcher until 26th November, 1992.According to fellow founding member Greg Page, "Archie had considerable input into the arrangement of some songs on that first CD ... he is quite a musical genius ... However ... the musical direction of the Wiggles was changing". Australian Record Industry Association (ARIA) awarded the band members, including Wilcher, with gold and platinum certificates for the album. In two letters dated April 21st and May 24th, 1995, to ABC Enterprises, Wilcher addressed certain concerns about his involvement with The Wiggles. Wilcher claims he was advised by Jeremy Fabinyi to write a letter of resignation so to officially release him from incurring any expenses for albums subsequent to the debut album. It had nothing to do with Wilcher leaving the group as a composer/writer for which he claims he had a verbal agreement. 
In 1993, Wilcher published a lesson plan for early childhood activities, A Musical Offering. The Australian composer and music educator, Dulcie Holland remarked: “Phillip Wilcher’s  'A Musical Offering' is an ingenious and imaginative approach to music. Through rhythm and rhyme, movement and sound, the very young person is gently introduced to music as an enjoyable activity. This will provide a wonderful foundation for a lifetime of musical experience and richness.” Holland would later set Wilcher's poem 'Sounds and Silence' from 'A Musical Offering' for women's choir. It was premiered by the Faye Dumont Singers and later published by EMI.In 2000, for reasons not entirely clear, the Wiggles had not only rerecorded their first album, but also renamed it "Wiggle Time" and removed all of his compositions. In 2005, when the Wiggles had become Australia's most successful children's act, he seemed to criticise the Wiggles in the press, but he has since stated that reporters had misrepresented him and that he chose to remain silent in the aftermath of their articles.


=== Later career ===
Phillip Wilcher's has composed over 100 works for solo piano, pieces for soloist and piano as well as chamber ensembles. His music was described by The Sydney Morning Herald's Steve Dow as "an eclectic mix of classical and flim-flam". Wilcher's compositions are influenced by Chopin and J.S. Bach, and some of his works are notable for their use of Eastern scales, such as his Six Etudes, which uses Chinese and Japanese scales. He has composed music for pianist Aaron McMillan, and for musician and former ABC broadcaster, news reader and journalist, Clive Robertson. He has also set poetry by American librettist Jack Larson to music. In 2007, he composed "1791", a work honouring Mozart on the anniversary of his death, which was performed by oboist Rachel Tolmie, and the Bourbaki String Ensemble conducted by David Angell. It appeared on a compilation album, Into His Countenance (2008), which featured various artists performing Wilcher's compositions.

His works have been included on several other CDs released by Jade Music and Wirripang. Pianist Jeanell Carrigan has recorded six CDs of his compositions, two for Publications by Wirripang. Carrigan, on the transportive nature of Wilcher's music, remarked: "Whether he wishes to transport the listener to a cafe in Paris or to the top of a mountain in Java, his skilful use of harmony, rhythm and tempi creates the perfect atmosphere." Rita Crews, in a review of Carrigan's album Shimmer (2004) for The Studio Quarterly Magazine, described Wilcher's style as "free-flowing, with an underlying romantic character, one in which melodic line and lyricism are all-important elements". 2MBS-FM's Mike Smith found it was of "a more openly romantic nature than in his earlier" work and he was "reminded of Rachmaninov, Albeniz and even Brahms".As well as composing, Wilcher has performed both solo and with ensembles. This has included playing three times for the Liberace Foundation in Las Vegas. His music has been broadcast by radio stations, ABC-FM and 2MBS-FM – the latter has aired two documentaries on his music, Wilcher and the French Connection and Wilcher's World. He has had an active public speaking career, and is an elected life member of Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA) and a board member of the Australian Music Teacher Magazine, for which he has written articles on Chopin, Brahms, Ravel, and music education.In 2011, on learning of the death of Benjamin Daniel Breedlove who was an American YouTuber from Texas, Wilcher wrote a piece of music for string quartet titled "Remembered On Waking". The piece was performed and recorded by the Linden Quartet on Wilcher's album Heaven-Haven, published by Wirripang.Heaven-Haven was released in 2014. The music was performed by the Linden String Quartet. During production of the CD, Wilcher saw press reports about the fatal attack of 18-year-old Sydney resident Thomas Kelly; Wilcher was unable to separate the sorrow he felt for Kelly and his family from the sentiment he was trying to convey through his music. He eventually dedicated the project to Kelly and announced that proceeds from the album would benefit the Thomas Kelly Youth Foundation. Wilcher's 2017 album, The Voice of Love, is dedicated to Rosemary Eather, the host of the Australian children's television show, Good Morning!!! and friend to the composer and featured solo piano and piano and cello pieces. The performers were Jeanell Carrigan (piano) and Minah Choe (cello). For the 2019 release of Spellbound, they were joined by Goetz Richter (violin). Pieces for various combinations of piano, violin and cello appear on the disc, with Wilcher's demanding Four Scherzi as a framing device. Brennan Keats, head of Wirripang publishing, contributed some insightful thoughts about Wilcher in the liner notes: "Phillip Wilcher is a man 'spellbound' by a profound spirituality that he rationalises with a natural philosophy that transcends most who live in the superficial world that confronts us today. There is a depth in him expressed by gentleness, kindness and demonstrated by the great love he exudes. All this is tempered by discipline, precision, delicacy and firmness of touch that only the truest, yet finest of musicians can expound. Of all the discs that he has produced, this is the most aptly named, in that it summarises a composer, musician and writer of integrity, and one of those rare beings who rises above all he encounters and yet remains very much one of us."In 2017, soprano, Ayse Goknur Shanal premiered two songs written for her by Wilcher at the Sydney Opera House, “In the Nape of a Dream” and “Spirit Song”, which was specifically written at the request of Goknur Shanal for inclusion in her 'Songs for Refugees' concert.
“The idea for this concert was a seed I have been watering since September 2015 when I saw the image of the Syrian toddler with the tiny jeans shorts and red t-shirt washed up on the Turkish shores. It broke me,” Goknur Shanal revealed. Together with cellist Kenichi Mizushima and pianist Harry Collins, this monumental evening, was organised by the grassroots network, Mums 4 Refugees, with the proceeds being donated to the charitable law firm, Human Rights for All, which represents refugee cases, on pro bono basis. "The concert include[d] works by, Massenet, Puccini, Giordano, as well as the world premiere of Spirit, written by Australian composer, Phillip Wilcher." (Sydney Opera House press release).More recently, Wilcher has published a number of books, including an autobiography, titled 'Thinking Allowed'. He has written a full-scale piano recital for the virtuoso pianist Simon Tedeschi, and his music has attracted the attention of, and been performed by pianists overseas, notably Gerhard Eckle, Eduardo Fernandez, Lemuel Grave, Adam Jackson, and Emanuel Rimoldi.
Simon Tedeschi said of Wilcher's work: 'Phillip Wilcher's music dreamily evokes another time, another place. It has a searching quality that conjures up images of the great Romantic composers. Phillip wrote a recital for me, which I hope to present soon. Included in that are the ‘Etudes Tedeschi’ which have all the flavour and technical imagination of similar great works in the piano repertoire. I am proud to watch the evolution of this musician and composer who I count as a great personal friend.
Other musicians who have performed and recorded Wilcher’s works include John Martin (piano), Rachel Tolmie (oboist), Marina Marsden (violinist), Justine Marsden (violist), Elizabeth Neville (cellist), Emily Long (violinist), Melissa Doecke (flautist), Martin Cooke (singer), Neil Fissenden (flautist), David Wickham (pianist), Minah Choe (cellist).Wilcher continues to compose and release music, with his most recent release, Spellbound coming in 2019. Writing for the Music Teachers Association of Australia's "The Studio" journal, reviewer Marlicia Travis had this to say about the "Spellbound" CD:

Exploring a vast array of emotion and sensory delight, Phillip Wilcher grasps and displays as much as Dr Miriam Hyde spoke of him when she said, as quoted in the brochure which accompanies this CD, “I find great satisfaction in the fact that we – Australia – have one composer who can succeed in a medium of sensitivity in spite of the ugliness and violence predominating in so many countries.” This is exactly what is presented in Spellbound. Twenty tracks composed between 2005 and 2018 reveal a sensitivity and experience akin to an inner exploration of one’s self. The detail in touch and sound, in contrast and colour, reach into every part of the audience to achieve an experience that will be remembered. Acclaimed for his compositions by Sir Frank Callaway, Dr Rita Crews, Mike Smith, Dr Franz Holford, Richard Gill, and many others, for his unique mastery of soul stirring technique, Spellbound does not disappoint. Recorded in February, 2019, in the Verbrugghen Hall of Sydney Conservatorium of Music, with Goetz Richter on violin, Minah Choe on cello and Jeanell Carrigan on piano, the sensitivity and sounds of Wilcher’s composition are brought to life and recorded by David Kim-Boyle with a beautiful clarity and collaboration that feels magical. The combination of the three instruments brings a natural connectedness and fluidity that delights. Each performer beautifully weaves their own part in each piece, rising and falling, emerging and supporting, as they take their turns in bringing melody to your ears. It is interesting to note that Richter (violin) holds a similar interest to Wilcher in thinking and philosophy. The depth that deep thinking presents, and that philosophy holds can be known in the presentation of Spellbound. Once you listen to this music, you’ll want to be a part of it; it takes you away on a journey. This is pure rest and recreation for musicians to indulge in. Music teachers throughout the world can benefit from owning a copy of Spellbound in more ways than enjoying and playing the music. Inspiring future composers is a natural outcome with Spellbound. Wilcher is an Australian composer, paving a wonderful pathway for other young Australian composers to follow in. We go to the masters for inspiration. The beauty of Spellbound holds such credibility. The life of composition in the present, right now, must be embraced.


== Faith and religious beliefs ==
According to Wilcher's autobiography Thinking Allowed, on 10 March 1991, after being encouraged by Anthony Field to pursue the Catholic faith, Wilcher was baptised at the Mount St. Francis Friary, Kellyville, New South Wales. Fr Max Balabanski was the priest presiding. Anthony Field was sworn in as Wilcher's godfather, and Field's mother Marie was sworn in as his godmother. Also in attendance were Paul and John Field, after which a luncheon was held in the Field's family home. Wilcher is of no fixed denomination today, but acknowledges the importance of the teachings of Christ in his life.Where Wilcher himself draws direct alignment between the writing of his music and creativity at the source, it was the late Raymond Smullyan who heard a correlation between Wilcher's music and  the religious or philosophical traditions of the East. Says Wilcher: I first came into contact with Raymond via YouTube after he had commented favourably on my music. Later, he invited me to submit a chapter about myself for the book In Their Own Words (The Piano Society 2009 Lulu Press) which he was editing with Peter Bispham : "I wish to compliment Taoism and Zen Buddhism by saying that I see a certain similarity between them and your music."


== Bibliography ==
Wilcher, Phillip (1993). "A musical offering" : a lesson plan comprising 6 early childhood musical activities. Concord, New South Wales, Australia: P. Wilcher. ISBN 978-0-646-13680-6. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
Wilcher, Phillip (2000). 27. Concord, NSW: P. Wilcher. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
Wilcher, Phillip (2016). Thinking Allowed: A life in conversation with itself. Wollongong, NSW: Wirripang. Retrieved 8 July 2018.
Wilcher, Phillip (2016). Divinity: A dialogue between the self and music at the source. Wollongong, NSW: Wirripang. Retrieved 8 July 2018.


== Discography ==
Studio albums

Arabesque (2000)
Out of the Blowing Sands (2001)
Etchings  (2002)
Shimmer (2004)
Bundanon (2009)
Wind Chimes (2012)
Heaven Haven (2014)
The Voice of Love (2017)
Spellbound (2019)Compilation albums

Into His Countenance (2008)
Goldleafing a Dream (2011) 


== Citations ==


== External links ==
Official website