Ted Gioia (born 21 October 1957) is an American jazz critic and music historian. Gioia is an editor-in-chief of the Encyclopedia of Jazz Musicians and has authored a number of books on jazz such as The Jazz Standards: A Guide to the Repertoire, The History of Jazz and Delta Blues. He is also a jazz musician and one of the founders of Stanford University's jazz studies program.


== Early years ==
Gioia grew up in an Italian-Mexican household in Hawthorne, California, and later earned degrees from Stanford University and Oxford University, as well as an MBA from the Stanford Graduate School of Business. He served for a period as an adviser to Fortune 500 companies while with the Boston Consulting Group and McKinsey & Company. When Gioia worked amidst Silicon Valley's venture capital community on Sand Hill Road, he was known as the "guy with the piano in his office." Gioia is also owner of one of the largest collections of research materials on jazz and ethnic music in the Western United States.
Gioia is the brother of poet Dana Gioia.


== Career ==
Gioia is the author of several books on music, including Music: A Subversive History (2019), West Coast Jazz (1992), The Jazz Standards: A Guide to the Repertoire (2012), and The Birth (and Death) of the Cool (2009). A second updated and expanded edition of The History of Jazz was published by Oxford University Press in 2011. Love Songs: The Hidden History, published by Oxford University Press in 2015, is a survey of the music of courtship, romance, and sexuality; it completes a trilogy of books on the social history of music that includes Work Songs (2006) and Healing Songs (2006). All three books have been honored with the ASCAP Deems Taylor Award. In his study of love songs, Gioia contends that innovations in the history of this music came from Africa and the Middle East.In 2006, Gioia was the first to expose, in an article in the Los Angeles Times, the FBI files on folk and roots music icon Alan Lomax. He founded jazz.com in December 2007 and served as president and editor until 2010. He has also created a series of websites on contemporary fiction.
Gioia is also a jazz pianist and composer. He has produced recordings featuring Bobby Hutcherson, John Handy, and Buddy Montgomery.
In 2021 Gioia announced on Twitter his forthcoming collaboration with Ted-Ed on an animated introduction to jazz history.


== Awards and honors ==
Lifetime Achievement Award in Jazz Journalism, Jazz Journalists Association, 2017.The Dallas Morning News has called Ted Gioia "one of the outstanding music historians in America." His concept of "post-cool" described in his book The Birth (and Death) of the Cool, was selected as one of the Big Ideas of 2012 by Adbusters magazine.ASCAP Deems Taylor Award: The Imperfect Art (1989), Work Songs (2006), Healing Songs (2006), Love Songs: The Hidden History (2015).


== Books ==


== Selected discography ==


=== Selected audio and visual ===
The End of The Open Road, Ted Gioia Trio"Stella by Starlight
"A Sunday Waltz"
"All The Things You Are"
"Siena"
"Lullaby in G"
"I Fall in Love too Easily"
"The Open Road"
"The End Of The Open Road"
"Do I Love You Because You're Beautiful"
"Epilogue: Sunday Night"DiscussionsDelta Blues
The History of the Love Song
The Crisis in Music


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Interview with Ted Gioia (The Atlantic Monthly)
Ted Gioia discusses his book Delta Blues (video)
Interview with Ted Gioia on National Public Radio
Interview with Ted Gioia on JazzWax
"Changing His Tune: A Jazz Expert Turns to Simpler Songs" - An interview with Ted Gioia by Cynthia Haven (Stanford Magazine, March / April 2007)
Jonathan Yardley, "All the Right Notes." The Washington Post (Sunday, November 30, 1997; Page X03)
Encyclopedia of Jazz Musicians
Conceptual Fiction
Great Books Guide
The New Canon
Postmodern Mystery
Fractious Fiction