Martin Perna is an educator, and multidisciplinary artist living in Houston, Texas.


== Music ==
Perna, who is of Mexican American descent, founded the musical groups Antibalas and Ocote Soul Sounds, and has written for and/or recorded with Sharon Jones, Scarlett Johansson, Baaba Maal, Angelique Kidjo, David Byrne, the Whitefield Brothers, the Daktaris, No Surrender, Apsci, Architecture in Helsinki, and many other groups.


== Education ==
Perna began his educational work in 1992 at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia as an overnight docent during the Camp-In Program. From 1998-2000, he taught at El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice in Brooklyn, New York. He has integrated education into his work as a musician, conducting musical workshops at Yale, McGill, Haverford, New York University, Concordia, University of Texas-Austin, and University of St. Denis (Île Réunion).


== Multidisciplinary Art ==
He is author of the children's book BLACKOUT! about the 2003 blackout in the Northeastern United States and Canada, published in 2006 by Magic Propaganda Mill and illustrated by Ricardo Cortes.
An apprentice of earth architecture master Nader Khalili Perna also practices superadobe architecture and has created works in Michoacán, Mexico, and Austin, Texas.


== Partial Discography ==
The Very Best "untitled" Flute, baritone saxophone Daktaris "Soul Explosion" Flute, tenor saxophone.
Mike Jackson and the Soul Providers "Revenge of Mr. Mopoji"
Nino Nardini "Rotonde Musique" Flute, saxophone Lee Fields "Let's Get a Groove On" Baritone saxophone Sharon Jones and the Dap Kings "Dap Dippin'" Baritone saxophone Antibalas "Liberation Afrobeat Vol. 1" Baritone saxophone, percussion Antibalas "Talkatif" Baritone saxophone Antibalas "Who Is This America" Baritone saxophoneAntibalas "Government Magic" Baritone saxophoneAntibalas "Security" Baritone SaxAntibalas "Antibalas" Baritone SaxTV on the Radio "Satellite" FlutesTV on the Radio "Desperate Youth, Bloodthirsty Babes" Flutes, saxophonesTV on the Radio "Return to Cookie Mountain" Flute, saxophones, percussionTV on the Radio "Dear Science," Flutes, saxophonesOcote Soul Sounds "El Niño y El Sol" Flutes, saxophones, guitars, percussionOcote Soul Sounds "The Alchemist Manifesto" Vocals, flutes, saxophones, guitars, percussionOcote Soul Sounds "Coconut Rock" Vocals, flutes, saxophones, guitars, percussionOcote Soul Sounds "Taurus" Vocals, flutes, saxophones, guitars, percussionElvis Costello and The Roots "Walk Us Uptown" Chico Mann Antibalas rework. Saxophones
DJ Sun "Heart Seed featuring Leah Alvarez and Martin Perna", flute


== References ==


== External links ==
Ocote Soul Sounds
Personal site
Antibalas
Martin sits down with Ira Haberman of The Sound Podcast for a feature interview