Jeff Blue (born November 21, 1967) is a multi-platinum record producer, A&R executive, songwriter, lawyer and best selling author who is currently an A&R consultant for Atlantic Records. He has worked as Senior Vice President of A&R and staff producer for Warner Bros. Records, Interscope Records, Virgin Records, Capitol Records, Sony BMG, Jive Records, RCA Records, and J Records. He specializes in discovering and recruiting unsigned artists. He discovered, developed, and signed Linkin Park, Macy Gray, Daniel Powter, and The Last Goodnight. In addition to signing Limp Bizkit and Korn to publishing deals, and executive producing and music supervising Aaliyah's Queen of the Damned soundtrack, he has written hit singles for artists such as Hoobastank, Syndicate, and The Last Goodnight.


== Biography ==
Blue graduated from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and Loyola Law School in Los Angeles. He was a Communications Major focusing on Media Law and interning for Harvey Levin in the CBS TV News Dept, reporting on legal issues. After passing the Bar, Blue worked as a music journalist for Billboard, HITS and Entertainment Weekly, and eventually published his own magazine, Crossroads, which focused on discovering unsigned artists while he simultaneously managed, produced, and played drums in two signed major label bands while also working as an attorney for the law offices of Ross Schwartz. During this time he also pursued a career in acting  which led to him featuring in many national television commercials.
Zomba Music Publishing was impressed by Blue's versatility, and hired him. He cites that the combined experience from his professions gave him the insights and thoughts he needed to succeed in the Artists and Repertoire division. During his career with Zomba, Blue taught "Songwriting" and "Artist Development" classes at UCLA. Blue hired guitarist Brad Delson as his intern and signed his band, Xero to a publishing deal on the night of their first performance. After developing Xero for two years, and changing the band name to Hybrid Theory, Blue met Chester Bennington, a singer from Arizona, after the first audition with TJ Demonte (friend of Aaron Lewis of Staind) fell through due to logistics. Blue shopped the band for three years and showcased them forty-four times. Unable to get them a deal, Blue negotiated his employment contract with Warner Bros. Records to include the signing of Linkin Park. Months later, they released their debut album, Hybrid Theory, which became the best selling debut album of the 21st century.Blue also developed and co-wrote with Macy Gray. After recording Gray's demos, Blue secured a deal for the artist with Epic Records and which led to him co-writing the top ten hit "Still" for Gray.  During this time Blue also signed rock bands Korn and Limp Bizkit to publishing deals. Blue's discoveries and signings have helped shape popular culture for the last 20 years.
Blue personally signed as a writer to Warner Chappell Music Publishing and in addition to signing Linkin Park he worked, signed and developed and wrote for releases such as Queen of the Damned soundtrack, Beautiful Creatures, several compilations, and co-developed the artist Daniel Powter.
Blue co-produced the 2005 Better than Ezra album, "Before the Robots" which spawned two top ten singles. In 2008 he developed, co-wrote, and co-produced the debut album for Roadrunner artist, Steadlur.
Blue is currently signed as a songwriter to BMG Music Publishing, formerly at Universal Music Publishing where he co-wrote the 2009 hit single "So Close, So Far" for multi-Platinum artist Hoobastank. Blue won a BMI Award for his songwriting on "Pictures of You" for The Last Goodnight. He additionally produced, A&R'd, and performed all the drums and percussion on the Virgin Records album which also spawned Australia's #1 song of the year, and "Stay Beautiful".
Blue created Jeff Blue Music and Century Park Entertainment in 2009 and the company has yielded 4 major label signings in its first three years, focusing on developing talent  and teaming with Major Labels in the furthering of the artists career. The company focuses on all genres including rock, country, hard rock, alternative, indie, pop, r&b, dub step and electronic. His first signing was Emphatic which he immediately secured a major label deal for with Atlantic Records. Blue was Exec. Producer, co-writer, co-manager, and co- A&R. His song "Put Down the Drink" hit #1 for 3 weeks on Sirius Octane.  Then Syndicate to Sony AUS, and Shoreline's End to Island Def Jam/Mercury. In addition, Blue Developed writers Shawn Hlookoff (EMI), Jared Lee (Universal)
In 2012 Blue signed, co-wrote, and developed WERM after discovering the band on Music Xray, creating a unique blend of rock, dubstep, house, electronic, and alternative music. Three months after its creation, Blue signed the band to Universal Republic/Jeff Blue Music. In 2020  Simon & Schuster published, One Step Closer, From Xero to #1; Becoming Linkin Park, written by Blue.  His docu-series on the history of A&R is scheduled for release in 2022.


== References ==


== External links ==
Jeff Blue Music Official Website
Jeff Blue @ IMDB.com
Jeff Blue @ MSN Music
Jeff Blue @ Artist Direct