Barry Gordon (born December 21, 1948) is an American actor and political talk show host. He was the longest-serving president of the Screen Actors Guild, having served from 1988 to 1995.


== Early life ==
Gordon was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, United States. His stepfather, Bob Manning, was a crooner of popular love songs in the 1940s and 1950s, most known for his rendition of Hoagy Carmichael's  "The Nearness of You".


== Acting ==


=== Childhood career ===
Gordon began performing at age three; in his television debut, he won second place on Ted Mack's Amateur Hour singing Johnnie Ray's "Cry". At six, Gordon recorded "Nuttin' for Christmas". He was the youngest performer to hit a pre-Hot 100 Billboard chart when that song hit No. 6 in 1955. It sold over 1 million copies, and was awarded a gold disc. The next year, he charted his second and final single "Rock Around Mother Goose". In circa 1956, Bill Haley recorded a private demo recording "Six Year Olds Can Rock and Roll". He begins the recording (released in 1990) by dedicating it to Barry Gordon.As a child actor, Gordon also appeared on The Jackie Gleason Show, The Jack Benny Program, Richard Diamond, Private Detective, The Danny Thomas Show, Alfred Hitchcock Presents and Star Time with Benny Goodman. Gordon was cast as Humberto in an episode of the sitcom Sally, starring Joan Caulfield, and as Chopper in Leave It to Beaver (episode 119: "Beaver's House Guest"). Gordon guest starred on the sitcoms The Ann Sothern Show and Dennis the Menace.
In 1962, Barry played the part of the childhood version of the Patient in "Pressure Point". At 13, Gordon began a career on Broadway as Nick in Herb Gardner's A Thousand Clowns, a role for which he earned a Tony Award nomination. He later reprised that role in the film version opposite Jason Robards and Martin Balsam in 1965. The film gave him "introducing" billing, but he had actually been in several films already, most notably his actual film debut in 1956's The Girl Can't Help It as a newspaper boy in which he uttered the line after seeing Jayne Mansfield: "If that's a girl, I don't know what my sister is."
As a teen, Gordon starred alongside Sid Caesar and Vera Miles in the 1967 comedy-horror film The Spirit Is Willing. In the 1970s, Gordon appeared in the Barney Miller spin-off Fish, starring Abe Vigoda, and from 1973 to 1974 was a regular on The New Dick Van Dyke Show. He also played a waiter in "Horror in the Heights", a 1974 episode of Kolchak: The Night Stalker. In 1976, he appeared in an episode of The Practice.


=== Character actor ===
Primarily as a character actor, Gordon became a familiar face in numerous feature films and television series. In the last two seasons of the sitcom Archie Bunker's Place, Gordon had the recurring role of Gary Rabinowitz, Archie's Jewish attorney and love interest of Barbara Lee "Billie" Bunker (played by Denise Miller). Gordon also had notable guest-starring roles on Barney Miller as an embezzler, on Fish as a social worker, on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine as a Ferengi businessman, and on Star Trek: Voyager as Ardon Broht, an alien publisher. More recently, Gordon has appeared as the Rabbi in Larry David's Curb Your Enthusiasm.


=== Voice work ===
Gordon worked extensively as a voice actor. His most notable voice roles were Donatello and Bebop in Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, and as Jake "Razor" Clawson in SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron (1993). Gordon's voice was also featured in other animated series Mostly Hanna-Barbera shows such as Jabberjaw (as Clamhead), Tarzan, Lord of the Jungle, The Kid Super Power Hour with Shazam! (as Captain Marvel Jr.), Meatballs & Spaghetti (as bassist Clyde), Pac-Man (as Inky), Mighty Orbots (as Robert Simmons), Pole Position, The Jetsons, The Smurfs, The Adventures of the American Rabbit (as the titular character), Superman, Snorks (as Junior Wetworth), Gravedale High (as Reggie Moonshroud), Space Cats, A Pup Named Scooby-Doo (as Englebert Newton), Darkwing Duck (as Dr. Fossil), Tom & Jerry Kids and its spin-off Droopy, Master Detective, Batman: The Animated Series (as the Penguin's henchman Sheldrake), Aaahh!!! Real Monsters, Timon & Pumbaa, Fantastic Max, and The Pirates of Dark Water. Gordon also provided the voice of "Quicky" the Nesquik Bunny in television commercials for Nestlé.
In May 2009, Gordon played the Cocker Spaniel in the Webkinz Pet of the Month Music Video for May 2009.
Gordon reprised the roles as the original Donatello and Bebop in three seasons of Nickelodeon's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.


== Other pursuits ==
In his mid-30s, Gordon returned to school; he graduated summa cum laude as a political science major from California State University, Los Angeles and went on to Loyola Law School, receiving his J.D. in 1991.
Gordon became the longest-serving president of the Screen Actors Guild, holding the office for seven years.
In 1998, Gordon was the Democratic Party nominee for the United States Congress from the Pasadena, California area. He surprised political pundits of both parties by coming within three points of unseating the Republican Party incumbent James Rogan.
In 2004, when the local Air America Radio affiliate in Los Angeles went off the air, for a then-unspecified period of time, Gordon started a live, call-in progressive political talk show on Pasadena's public-access television cable TV channel 56. It continues to be cablecast and webcast live
In 2005, Gordon hosted a weekly radio talk show heard on KRLA in Los Angeles, California.
In 2006 and early 2007, Gordon hosted Barry Gordon from Left Field, a weekly talk show broadcast throughout the 25th largest U.S. radio market—the San Bernardino/Riverside region of Southern California—on KCAA Radio in Loma Linda, California. With live streams and podcast archives, the show was notable for featuring nationally known guests, including senators, congressmen, bestselling authors, and entertainment figures.
Since 2007, Gordon has taught courses in politics and the media at the California State University, Los Angeles.
In 2008, Gordon debuted his daily Internet talk show Left Talk on BlogTalkRadio.


== Personal life ==
Gordon married Sally Julin; the marriage ended in a divorce. He married Gail Schaper in 1993. They have two children.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Barry Gordon presidents of the Screen Actors Guild
Barry Gordon at the Allmusic
Barry Gordon at IMDb
Barry Gordon at the Internet Broadway Database 
Barry Gordon at the Internet Off-Broadway Database
NewsRap with Barry Gordon Flash video archives
BarryTalk.com, Barry Gordon's website, with links to live shows and archives of his radio, cable television, and Internet talk shows
Barry Gordon providing a profile on himself on YouTube