Dorce Gamalama (born 21 July 1963) is an Indonesian pop singer, actress, presenter, and comedian, who is a trans woman. She is often referred to as "Bunda" (Indonesian for "Mother").


== Early life ==
Gamalama was born in Solok, West Sumatra, Indonesia. Her mother Dalifah, a rice seller, died of unknown causes when she was 3 months old, whereas her father Achmad, a painter and soldier, left home when she was 5 months old and was found dead when she was a year old, leaving her orphaned. As a result, she was raised by her grandmother Darama, who introduced her to music while she was still at elementary school. She went on to sing with a group called the Bambang Brothers (BamBros). When she was 5 years old, she moved to the capital city to live with her aunt Dalima. She started working when she was only 7 years old: selling newspapers, washing dishes, and selling cakes around the neighborhood.Gamalama noted that she first experienced gender dysphoria when she was 7 years old, feeling imprisoned in her own body, and she first got the chance to wear a dress on stage during an Indonesian Independence Day school play where she played the role of a grandmother. In her teens, she began to appear on stage in women's clothes, moving from Bambros to the trans women-led band Fantastic Dolls, and she took the stage name Dorce Ashadi. She later underwent sex reassignment surgery in Surabaya. Her stage name derived from Mount Gamalama in Ternate. Her gender change was officially recognized in 1986.


== Career ==
Gamalama was the host of the popular mid-morning Dorce Show on the Trans TV network in Indonesia, and has written an autobiography entitled Aku Perempuan. She is of Minangkabau descent from her mother's side, as well as Binjai-Arab from her father's side. In her book, she revealed that when she was 23 years old, she was married to a man, whom she called "Mr X", but the marriage only lasted two years.Gamalama is a Muslim, and went on Hajj to Mecca in 1990 and 1991. On 9 November 2008, Gamalama attended the funeral of Imam Samudra, one of the men executed for the 2002 Bali bombings. She spent half an hour in the house of the executed man and spoke with his mother. On leaving she was quoted as saying "I'm certain he's gone to heaven".On 12 May 2009, Gamalama announced that her show had been cancelled.In June 2014, Gamalama was on an airplane riding in business class when she encountered then-presidential candidate Joko Widodo sitting in an economy class seat. She went on to endorse his presidential campaign, participating in a campaign event, "Join Jokowi", with hundreds of housewives near the Selamat Datang Monument. However, in July 2015, months after he was inaugurated as President of Indonesia, she retracted her endorsement when Widodo did not attend Masjid Al-Hayya's 52nd anniversary, saying she would back singer Rhoma Irama for president if Irama were to announce his run. Nevertheless, in December 2015, Widodo invited Gamalama to a party at Jakarta's Istana Negara.In November 2018, Gamalama sold her traditional Minang style home, a Rumah Gadang, for 2 billion Indonesian Rupiah (approximately $140,100) to help raise funds for orphaned children in Palestine, Syria, and Indonesia.In December 2019, Gamalama had a reunion with Sinta Nuriyah, the widow of former Indonesian president Abdurrahman Wahid (better known as Gus Dur).In January 2020, Gamalama started a floral design business in Bekasi, while having Type 2 diabetes and recovering from kidney stones.In June 2020, Gamalama worked as a chauffeur for fellow celebrity Raffi Ahmad and his wife, Nagita Slavina, for only a week, with Gamalama resigning due to medical reasons. She claimed she asked to be his chauffeur due to a dream she allegedly had during the month of Ramadan that year. After resigning, she said she wanted to drive for President Joko Widodo. Since Gamalama declined monetary compensation for her work, Ahmad decided to give her a video camera as a present, urging her to become a YouTuber.In January 2021, Gamalama's continued health complications prompted her to prepare for her Islamic funeral, from the burial plot to the kaffan shroud. She was reportedly hesitant about going through lithotomy to remove her kidney stones, instead opting for dietary changes and traditional medicine, such as water from the Zamzam Well in Mecca.In April 2021, amid fasting during Ramadan, Gamalama reportedly fell ill from hypotension, and said she planned to earn extra income from posting YouTube videos amid a drought in job offers.


== Personal life ==
Gamalama has four adopted children and owns a number of orphanages that have cared for thousands of children. She additionally has 6 grandchildren.


== Filmography ==
2008 - Mas Suka Masukin Aja
2009 - Hantu Biang Kerok as Mbah Upit


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Site
Dorce Gamalama at IMDb