Robert Hartley Elliott (born 8 December 1941) is an English rock drummer, best known for playing with The Hollies. He has been described as "one of the very finest drummers in all of pop/rock".


== Early life ==
Elliott discovered jazz music when he was 10 or 11 and wanted to become a drummer. He attended Nelson Grammar School, but is a self-taught drummer, who learnt to drum with home-made brushes and sticks, on tins and other household items, by copying Chico Hamilton of the Gerry Mulligan Quartet and Gene Krupa of the Benny Goodman Orchestra.Elliott was an original member of Johnny Theakston and The Tremeloes, who formed in 1959. Fronted by the vocalist Johnny Theakston, Elliott drummed alongside guitarists Jerry Wilcox and Mick Hay, and bassist William "Bonny" Oliver. In late 1960 they sent a demo tape to BBC Radio's Saturday Club, calling themselves Shane Fenton & The Fentones, but Theakston died before they received a reply. Having been offered an audition, the band's roadie Bernard Jewry (later known as Alvin Stardust), stepped in as vocalist, adopting the stage name Shane Fenton at Theakston's mother's request.Tommy Sanderson became their manager, and negotiated a record deal with EMI who released "I'm a Moody Guy", which reached 19 on the UK singles chart. The next three singles failed to chart, "Cindy's Birthday" was then a minor hit, before the following three singles also flopped, and the band broke up in April 1963.Elliott also played in Ricky Shaw and the Dolphins, a Manchester band led by guitarist Tony Hicks who left to join The Hollies in April 1963. Shortly after, the Hollies drummer Don Rathbone left and Elliott also joined the Hollies, whilst Jewry and Sanderson became the band's joint managers.
For Elliott's career with The Hollies, see The HolliesAs of 2021 Elliott still plays with the Hollies, and has recorded with almost no other band since 1963.In September 1973, Paul McCartney offered him the position of drummer in his band Wings, but Elliott declined due to commitments with The Hollies.Prominent drummers who were influenced by Elliott include Gilson Lavis, Ric Lee, Cozy Powell and Ian Paice.


== Personal life ==
Elliott had a long relationship with Maureen Hicks. Thanks to this relationship Elliott would meet Maureen's brother, Tony Hicks. Bobby is now married to Susan (Suzy) Elliott


== Kit ==
Toms:- 8"x10", 9"x12", 11"x14", 13"x16" Birch wood & laminate shells, made by Drum Workshop of Oxnard, California
Bass:- 18"x22" with DW 9000 double bass drum pedals
Snare:- 6.5" x 14" Ludwig hammered metal SD.
Cymbals:- Zildjian 12" Splash, 14" hi hats, 17" & 18" Custom K Dark Crash, 19" K Thin Dark Crash, 20" Medium Ride
Timbales:- LP 'Tito Puente' 12" & 13"


== References ==