Mark Spicoluk is a Canadian musician, lifestyle content creator, and entrepreneur. He is best known as the vocalist and bassist for the punk rock band Closet Monster and most recently working with his wife on their lifestyle brand/YouTube channel Boho Beautiful. From 2012 to 2015 he appeared as a judge on YTV's The Next Star. He is also known as the founder of the indie record label Underground Operations, playing bass with Avril Lavigne and his production credits on albums by artists such as Protest the Hero, Abandon All Ships, Stereos and DVBBS. Along with his musical and business accomplishments, he is also a strong animal rights and social justice advocate.


== Career overview ==
Spicoluk founded and played bass for the band Closet Monster from 1997 until their last show in December 2005, and established the indie punk rock label Underground Operations in 1995. In the winter of 2002 Spicoluk began playing bass for Avril Lavigne and helped prepare the launch of her first album "Let Go." From 2007 until 2012 he was an A&R Representative, eventually becoming Head of A&R for Universal Music Canada as well as a personal A&R for Gene Simmons at Simmons Records. He has production credits on albums by Protest the Hero, Abandon All Ships and many others. Most recently Spicoluk has co-founded a new entertainment business service company called Cloud Empire.Spicoluk appeared for two seasons on MuchMusic's reality show Disband from 2009–2011, and then judged on YTV's The Next Star for its last three seasons.


== Activism and charity work ==
Spicoluk is a vegan, and has publicly supported and worked with several animals rights groups in Toronto, including Toronto Pig Save, Peta2 and Mercy for Animals. He has also appeared in a public service announcement for Finding Fido, and has hosted parties for Fuck Cancer, a Montreal-based organization devoted to cancer research.


== Early bands ==
Spicoluk sang and played lead guitar in his first band, Public Display, formed with high school friends in 1995 under the name Special Ed. The band played shows all over Ontario, releasing a self-titled CD in 1996. After the band parted ways in 1997, Mark joined Sum 41 to play bass before leaving to form Closet Monster with another former Sum 41 member Jon Marshall.


== Closet Monster ==

Spicoluk was the bassist and vocalist for the political punk band Closet Monster during its entire existence from 1997–2005. Over the course of 7 albums and countless tours of North America and Europe, Mark also co-wrote every song and co-produced every release. Closet Monster's lyrics focused on political and social issues such as human rights violations, gender equality, anti-capitalism, and strongly supported animal rights. The band reunited for one show in 2009 at Wakestock festival in Wasaga Beach, Ontario.


== Avril Lavigne ==
Early in 2002, Spicoluk was hired to play bass in Avril Lavigne's band as well as help prepare the launch of her first album, Let Go. Appearing on TV shows such as Good Morning America, The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Live with Regis and Kelly, The Late Late Show with Craig Kilborn, and in stadiums all around the world. He was also featured in the videos for the songs "Complicated" and "Sk8er Boi". Spicoluk later left the band to focus on Closet Monster and Underground Operations.


== Underground Operations ==

Spicoluk founded Underground Operations to put out releases by his own bands, in hopes that one day they could also release other bands they knew. Originally called Underground Monkey Operations, the label released albums by Public Display and Closet Monster before becoming Underground Operations in 2002. Originally releasing albums by Toronto bands Hostage Life, Bombs Over Providence, and Marilyn's Vitamins, as well as the first of many records by Protest the Hero. By 2007 the label had released albums by The Brat Attack, Dead Letter Dept., I Hate Sally, and These Silhouettes. The next few years saw a change in sound for the label, releasing music by Aspirations, acoustic act Machete Avenue and the Juno-winning first album by Lights.  In the next few years the label released albums including Means, Kingdoms and Kathleen Turner Overdrive as well as the much loved The Holly Springs Disaster. Today the label is home to Abandon All Ships, Rob Moir, Diemonds, Skynet and Hands and Teeth. Spicoluk serves as the President/Founder.


== Universal Music Canada ==
In 2007, Spicoluk became an A&R representative at Universal Music Canada. Eventually he became Head of A&R, overseeing the entire domestic roster, including Drake, The Tragically Hip, Down With Webster, and Hey Ocean!. During his time at Universal, Spicoluk also worked as a personal A&R for Gene Simmons, signing bands Kobra and the Lotus and The Envy to his label Simmons Records.


== Cloud Empire ==
In 2013, Spicoluk partnered with artist manager Dan Hand to create Cloud Empire, a business collective. specializing in music, entertainment, and business services.


== Television work ==
Spicoluk appeared for two seasons as a panelist on the Muchmusic reality show Disband. Discovering the band Stereos on the show, Spicoluk went on to manage and develop the band into one of 2011's most successful new Canadian artists. 
In 2012 Spicoluk became a judge on YTV's The Next Star, a youth-oriented singing competition along with singers Tara Oram and Keshia Chante. In 2014, Chante was replaced by Dan Kanter.
Spicoluk also appears on the web show From Far And Wide, which crosses Canada documenting homegrown music.


== Closet Monster discography ==
So Be It - 1997
Pure Unfiltered Anarchy - 1998
A Fight For What Is Right - 1999
Where The Fuck Is Revolution? - 2000
Killed The Radio Star - 2002
We Rebuilt This City - 2004


== Studio production credits ==
Abandon All Ships – Infamous – 2012 – producer
DVBBS – Initio EP – 2012 – composer, producer
The Artist Life – Impossible – 2011 – composer
Abandon All Ships – Geeving – 2010 – composer, producer
Stereos – Stereos – Uncontrollable – 2010 – composer, executive producer
Stereos – Stereos – 2009 – executive producer/guest performer/composer
Chad Michael Stewart – Machete Avenue – 2008 – executive producer
Protest the Hero – Fortress −2008 – executive producer
These Silhouettes – Thomas EP – 2008 – producer
Protest the Hero – Kezia – 2006 – executive producer
The Brat Attack – 2006 – producer
Closet Monster – Re-built This City – 2005 – producer/performer
Protest the Hero – A Calculated Use of Sound – producer
Closet Monster – Killed the Radio Star – 2003 – producer/performance
Protest the Hero – Search for the Truth – 2003 – producer


== Music video appearances ==
Closet Monster – Mr. Holland vs. Acceptable Behaviour – Performer
Closet Monster – Corporate Media Death Squad – Performer
Avril Lavigne – Complicated – Performer
Avril Lavigne – Sk8er Boi – Performer
Protest the Hero – These Colours Don't Run – Cameo
Alexisonfire – Waterwings (And Other Poolside Fashion Faux Pas)
Closet Monster – Mamma Anti-Fascisto – Performer
The Brat Attack – Mr. Capitalist – Cameo
Closet Monster – Punk Rock Ruined My Life – Performer
Hostage Life – This Song Was Written by a Committee – Cameo
Protest the Hero – Palms Read – Feature
Lights – Drive My Soul – Role- The Spaceman
Stereos – Summer Girl – Cameo
Jhevon Paris – She Got Me – Cameo
Stereos – She Only Likes Me When She's Drunk – Cameo
Abandon All Ships – Geeving – Cameo


== Underground Operations roster history ==
Marilyn's Vitamins
Protest the Hero
Closet Monster
Bombs Over Providence
Dead Letter Dept.
Hostage Life
I Hate Sally
The Brat Attack
These Silhouettes
Aspirations
Kathleen Turner Overdrive
Means
The Holly Springs Disaster
Lights
Machete Avenue
Chad Michael Stewart
The Artist Life
Dean Lickyer
Sam Bradley
Kingdoms
Abandon All Ships
Diemonds
Rob Moir
Skynet
Hands and Teeth
Victory, Sweet Victory!


== See also ==
Boho Beautiful, a YouTube channel founded by Spicoluk in 2014


== References ==


== External links ==
Underground Operations official site