Jutta Koether (born 1958) is a German artist, musician and critic based in New York City and Berlin since the early 1990s.


== Early life and education ==
Koether was born in Cologne and studied art and philosophy at the University of Cologne. She relocated to New York City in 1991.


== Career ==
Koether's paintings are exercises in color, line, form and pattern and often feature text. Her style has precedent in the work of Sigmar Polke and Kenny Scharf. She is also inspired by artists and intellectuals who have created an alternative to mainstream culture, including underground filmmaker Kenneth Anger and musician Patti Smith. She has collaborated with Sonic Youth’s Kim Gordon on a number of projects, for example Her Noise at Tate Modern in 2005. Koether's work is also affiliated with Martin Kippenberger. Their relationship began in Cologne when she interviewed him for Spex magazine. Although her work is not as grandiose as Kippenberger, both their works engage with the dense history of European, and more specifically, German painting.
For much of the 1990s, she mixed graffiti-inspired brushwork, fluorescent colors (especially bright pink), fragmented images and assorted quotations on surfaces that had a vibrant, all-over undergrowth. Her solo show at Pat Hearn Gallery, New York, in 1997 featured a soundtrack by the artist, accompanied by Tom Verlaine.  Her visionary work, according to The New York Times art critic Roberta Smith, sees painting as multipurpose.Koether’s 2009 show entitled Lux Exterior at Reena Spaulings further explored a common thematic in her work, the relation of painting with other aspects of theoretical and counter culture. Koether’s 2009 show was discussed in David Joselit’s essay entitled Painting Beside Itself. The exhibition, which included a painting entitled Hot Rod (after Poussin) (2009) along with sculptural found objects and a series of three performances, was noted by Joselit as a “sophisticated response to the question which I began [this essay]: How does a painting belong to a network?”In spring 2012, Koether took part in the three-month exposition of  Whitney Biennial.  Around that time, she conceived two large series of works that respond directly to the French artist Nicolas Poussin, a reinterpretation of his The Seven Sacraments reimagined as a series of installations, and Seasons (2012), a response to Poussin’s The Four Seasons.Since 1985, Koether has also worked as a reviewer and editor for many magazines and journals such as Spex, Texte zur Kunst, Flash Art and Artscribe.
Koether has taught at many institutions, including Columbia University, the Academy of Fine Arts in Berlin, Yale University, and Bard College. Currently, she is a professor at the Hochschule für bildende Künste Hamburg.


== Selected exhibitions ==
2014	

Maquis, Galerie Francesca Pia, Zürich
A Moveable Feast - Part XV, Campoli Presti, Paris
Champrovement, Reena Spaulings, New York2013

Un établissement aux Folies-Koethère, Établissement d'en face projects, Brussels
Cycle 1. Jutta Koether. Viktoria, Luise, Isabelle, Praxes, Berlin
The Double Session, Campoli Presti, London
Seasons and Sacraments, Arnolfini, Bristol, United Kingdom
Seasons and Sacraments, Dundee Contemporary Arts, Dundee, United Kingdom2012

The Fifth Season, Bortolami Gallery, New York2011

Mad Garland, Campoli Presti, Paris
The Thirst, Moderna Museet, Stockholm
Berliner Schlussel, Galerie Daniel Buchholz, Berlin2009

Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven
Lux Interior, Reena Spaulings Fine Art, New York
Sovereign Women in Painting, Susanne Vielmetter Los Angeles Projects, Los Angeles2008

New Yorker Fenster, Galerie Daniel Buchholz, Köln
No.5, Kunsthall Landmark, Bergen
JXXXA LEIBHAFTIGE MALEREI, Sutton Lane, Paris
Touch and Resist, Song Song, Wien
Galerie Francesca Pia, Zürich2007

Anderungen aller Art, Kunsthalle Bern, Bern2006

Love In a Void, Akademie der Bildenden Künste, Vienna
Metalist Moment, Performance, Herald St, London2005

Very Lost Highway, Simultanhalle, Köln
extreme harsh, Ausstellungsraum Ursula Werz, Tübingen
I Is Had Gone, Thomas Erben Gallery, New York
Her Noise, South London Gallery, London
Blankness is not a Void, Standard Oslo, Oslo
Kim Gordon and Jutta Koether, Talk and Performance at Tate Modern, London2004

Curious Crystals of Unusual Purity, P.S.1 Institute for Contemporary Art, New York City
Fresh Aufhebung - Künstlerisches Interesse am philosophische verneinten Wunderglauben, Kölnischer Kunstverein, Köln
Galerie Meerrettich, Berlin
Fresh Aufhebung, 271 Grand Street, New York2003

Desire Is War, Galerie Meerrettich, Berlin
The Club in the Shadow, in collaboration with Kim Gordon, Kenny Schachter conTEMPorary, New York2002

Black Bonds, Jutta Koether and Steven Parrino, Swiss Institute, New York
Galerie Daniel Buchholz, Köln2000

Galerie Daniel Buchholz, Köln
zur grünen schenke-fünf uhr nachmittags. die geheimen Bilder, Galerie Freund, Wien1999
1998
Brushholder Value, Westfälischer Kunstverein, Münster
1994
Dysfunction USA, Arthur Rogers Gallery, New Orleans
1993
Parralax View: Cologne-New York, P.S. 1 Institute for Contemporary Art, New York
1987
Werkschau Jutta Koether, Kunstraum Stuttgart, Stuttgart


== References ==


== External links ==
Jutta Koether on ArtFacts.Net
Images, biography and texts from the Saatchi Gallery
Susanne Vielmetter Los Angeles Projects; Jutta Koether Biographie, Pressemitteilungen und Arbeiten General information on Jutta Koether
Martin Pesch: Jutta Koether at Galerie Daniel Bucholz (Review)
Jutta Koether at Campoli Presti