S. Sowmya (born 16 April 1969) is a Carnatic music singer. She learnt music initially from her father Dr. Srinivasan, and later from Dr. S. Ramanathan and Smt.T. Muktha. She was awarded Sangeetha Kalanidhi title by Madras Music Academy in 2019.


== Education ==
Ph. D. (Univ. of Madras, 2012) for dissertation "A study of the effect of temperature variations on the pitch of a double-headed drum (mridanga)"
M.Sc. (Chemistry), Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, 1992


== Musical career ==
Sowmya made her concert debut at the age of 11 at the samadhi of Sadasiva Brahmendra, in Nerur. In 1986, she had her first performance at the Madras Music Academy, aged just 17 and thereafter performed there every year for 33 years. She has performed in all major sabhas all over India and has presented her concerts in the United States of America, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, United Arab Emirates, Germany, France, Singapore, Malaysia, Switzerland, Belgium, New Zealand, Tanzania, Sri Lanka, and various other destinations throughout the world. She made her film debut as an actress in the movie Vaanavil Vaazhkai, which was released on 13 February 2015. Sowmya has appeared as a guest judge in several episodes of Vijay TV's musical reality-talent shows, including seasons 2, 3, and 4 of Airtel Super Singer, and seasons 2, 3, and 4 of Airtel Super Singer Junior. She was a permanent judge in seasons 1 and 2 of Raj TV's Carnatic music reality-talent show, Tanishq Swarna Sangeetham. Sowmya was also a permanent judge in seasons 1 and 2 of Jaya TV's Carnatic music reality-talent show, "Carnatic Music Idol".
In 1998, Sowmya co-founded Carnatica - an institution dedicated to classical music & dance instruction, archival, talent search and other related activities. She also co-authored the first comprehensive reference CD-ROM on Carnatic music, Nadanubhava, with her fellow musician Shashikiran, and with her husband Sridhar helping on the software side. She is a visiting professor at the Advanced School of Carnatic Music of the Music Academy Madras and a member of the academic council of the Tamil Nadu Music & Fine Arts University. She was also a member of the Governing Body of the Kalakshetra Foundation.
On 3 February  2013, she led and accompanied Nithyasree Mahadevan on Nithyasree's return-to-stage performance (after a traumatic period in Nithyasree's personal life) at the TTK auditorium of Madras Music Academy, to observe Tyagaraja Aradhana.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website