DiY Sound System, also known as the DiY Collective, was one of Britain's first house sound systems. The group "divided their activities between free parties and legal club nights, acting as a bridge between counter-culture and the mainstream".


== History ==
The DiY Collective was founded in Nottingham in 1989 as a reaction against the growing commercialisation  of pay parties,especially Orbital raves such as Biology. DiY's standpoint came from an merging of  anarchist principles and a history of attending both free festivals and clubs such as the Hacienda. They wished to form a cohesive, collective, political front against the prevailing anti-rave legislation that was beginning to come into force at that time. This became more marked around the time of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, with DiY playing a key role in the largest illegal rave ever put on at Castlemorton Common Festival prior to the Bill and a constant stream of illegal, outdoor parties (often at travellers' sites, quarries and disused airfields) all over the country. Simon Reynolds wrote that DiY threw "free parties at abandoned airfields or on hilltops, drawing a mixed crowd of urban ravers and crusty road warriors".DiY also worked successfully in the realm of legitimate club nights, starting with their first night at the Kool Kat, Nottingham on Nov 23rd 1989 on Harry's 23rd birthday. Their "Bounce" began at Venus, Nottingham in Feb 1991 and ran for five years at various clubs, including the legendary nights at the Dance Factory. Bounce began to tour the country as well as being a staple of Nottingham's night life and at one point had a network of nights in Liverpool, Manchester, Hull, Sheffield, Bristol, Birmingham, Exeter and Bath.The label put out releases from members of the DiY Collective, as well local artists including Atjazz, Rhythm Plate and Charles Webster.DiY continue to hold occasional free parties, typically to celebrate a milestone date - on 19 September 2009, DiY celebrated their 20th birthday with a free party in near their home town of Nottingham, and on 23 August 2014, they their 25th (Silver) birthday with a free party held in a field in Leicestershire.On 3 October 2020, it was announced that Pete Birch (DJ Woosh aka the Peacuful Ones) had died from cancer. Despite Covid restrictions, a wake was held in Nottingham and a ceremony was held at Prestwold Natural Burial Ground where he is interred. In May 2021 a birch tree was planted on his grave.


== See also ==
Exodus Collective
Free party
Spiral Tribe
Teknival


== References ==


== External links ==
DiY Sound System discography at Discogs