Christopher Stein (born January 5, 1950) is the co-founder and guitarist of the new wave band Blondie. He is also a producer and performer for the classic soundtrack of the hip hop film Wild Style, and writer of the soundtrack for the film Union City, as well as an accomplished photographer.


== Music ==

In 1973 Stein became the guitarist of the Stilettos and began a romantic relationship with Debbie Harry, one of the singers. In the summer of 1974 Stein, Harry and the band's rhythm section left to start their own group which they eventually called Blondie. They soon became fixtures in the punk and new wave scene centered around CBGB and Max's Kansas City and by the end of the decade achieved international stardom. Blondie broke up in 1982 but reformed in 1997 and have been active off and on ever since. In addition to being the sole writer of the Blondie song "Sunday Girl", Stein co-wrote numerous hits with Harry, including "Heart of Glass", "Dreaming", "Island of Lost Souls", "Rapture", and "Rip Her to Shreds". Stein also ran the Animal Records label between 1982 and 1984.In 2015, Blondie members Debbie Harry and Chris Stein made a guest appearance alongside The Gregory Brothers in an episode of Songify the News, and they collaborated again to parody the 2016 United States presidential election debates.


== Photography ==
A photographer, Stein documented the early New York City punk music scene, the visual allure of Debbie Harry and Blondie, and his collaborations with artists including Andy Warhol and H.R. Giger. Stein's photography was published most recently in September 2014 by Rizzoli in his book, Chris Stein / Negative: Me, Blondie, and the Advent of Punk.The book Negative: Me, Blondie and the Advent of Punk was launched with an exhibition at Somerset House in London, which also coincided with the fortieth anniversary of the formation of Blondie. Some of the photographs in Negative have also been published in the Debbie Harry, Chris Stein and Victor Bockris co-authored volume Making Tracks: The Rise of Blondie, first published by Elm Tree, London (1982). Making Tracks was later reissued by Da Capo, New York (1998).
Stein's photography has also been shown in an exhibition at the Morrison Hotel Gallery, West Hollywood in August 2013; in a joint exhibition with Eddie Duggan at the University of Suffolk (April–May 2017), entitled A la recherche du punk perdu, and in an exhibition in a Blondie 'pop-up' shop in London's Camden Market, linked to the 2017 Blondie performance at the Roundhouse.


== Personal life ==
Stein was born to Jewish parents in Brooklyn, New York. He grew up in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, and  attended Midwood High School in Brooklyn, but was expelled for wearing long hair. While in Blondie, Stein and Harry maintained a romantic relationship but never married. In 1989, the couple went their separate ways but have continued to work together on a professional basis. Stein was co-host of TV Party, a public-access television cable TV show in New York City, that ran from 1978 to 1982.In 1983, Stein was diagnosed with pemphigus vulgaris, a rare autoimmune disease of the skin. He was cared for by his then-partner Debbie Harry and he has since regained normal function. Stein had developed a mild form of the disease, and was able to control it with a program of steroids. As of 2016, he was still touring and recording with Blondie.In 1999, Stein married actress Barbara Sicuranza, with whom he has two daughters, Akira and Valentina.


== See also ==
List of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees


== References ==


== External links ==
Chris Stein official website
Blondie official website
International Pemphigus Foundation
Rednight.net