Ransom Wilson (born October 25, 1951) is an American flutist and conductor. Studying at the Juilliard School in New York City, he formed a close friendship with Jean-Pierre Rampal. His other flute teachers have included Alain Marion, Severino Gazzelloni, Julius Baker, Christian Lardé, Philip Dunigan, and Arthur Lora.
These days, he is active in conducting, including the New York City Opera, the Metropolitan Opera, and he is also the founder and conductor of Solisti New York Orchestra. In 2010 he formed a new ensemble in New York City, Le Train Bleu.  The group performed actively until recently.  His conducting teachers include Roger Nierenberg, James Dixon, Otto-Werner Mueller and Leonard Bernstein.  He is the former Director of Orchestras at his alma mater, the University of North Carolina School of the Arts, SUNY Purchase Conservatory of Music.  He is the current Music Director of the Redlands Symphony, and on the faculty of the Yale School of Music.


== Studies ==
Wilson studied under Julius Baker at the Juilliard School, but in an interview he said that he did not have a good relationship with him. Therefore, he transferred to Arthur Lora's class. Lora played Principal Flute at the Metropolitan Opera, as well as Principal Flute in the NBC Symphony Orchestra under Arturo Toscanini. Afterwards, he received a Fondation Atlantique scholarship to stude privately for 1 year in Paris with Jean-Pierre Rampal.  His conducting teachers were Roger Nierenberg, James Dixon, Otto-Werner Mueller, and Leonard Bernstein.


== Conducting ==
In recent years, Wilson has moved towards the operatic repertoire, appearing at the New York City Opera as conductor, and since 2006 as Cover Conductor on numerous productions at the Metropolitan Opera. In 2016 he became the Music Director of the Redlands Symphony in Southern California.  While he maintains his teaching position at Yale University, he is in Redlands every month for rehearsals and concerts. In January 2021, he announced he would be collaborating with the Ulysses String Quartet on a recording to be released later in the year.


== Departure from UNCSA ==
On May 21, 2010, Wilson gave his final concert as conductor of the school's orchestra. During the performance and in a note published in the Winston-Salem Journal he made statements critical of the school's administration. According to the Classical Voice of North Carolina, "A discordant note to the evening came in Wilson's parting words spoken before the last work was played. He said he was leaving the School of the Arts because of irreconcilable differences with the current administration." According to The Business Journal of the Greater Triad Area, "Despite an unusual outburst of public criticism from a high-profile faculty member, UNC-School of the Arts Chancellor John Mauceri appears to retain the confidence of key supporters in the Twin City’s business community.


== References ==


== External links ==
Ransom Wilson