Kelly Cherelle Price (born April 4, 1973) is an American R&B and gospel singer. She started her singing career in 1992. Price originally garnered attention by singing backing vocals for Mariah Carey on multiple songs, including her Billboard Hot 100 number one singles: "Fantasy" and "All I Want for Christmas Is You"; before rising to greater prominence after making uncredited guest appearances on the number one single "Mo Money Mo Problems" by The Notorious B.I.G., as well as "Feel So Good" by Mase, which prompted her to release her own music. Her debut album Soul of a Woman (1998), was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America.
The album's lead single "Friend of Mine" reached the top 20 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. In 1998, Price was featured on the Whitney Houston single "Heartbreak Hotel" alongside Faith Evans, which peaked at number two and earned her a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals. Her second album, Mirror Mirror (2000), and her fourth album Priceless (2003), both reached the top ten on the Billboard 200 chart. In 2016, she made an uncredited appearance on Kanye West's song "Ultralight Beam" from his album The Life of Pablo.
Price has won a Soul Train Music Award, and has received nine Grammy Award nominations.


== Life and music career ==
Price was born in Far Rockaway, Queens, New York City, and began singing in church as a toddler. Her first professional engagement was with George Michael at Madison Square Garden in January 1992. During rehearsals for the 1992 Grammy Awards the next month, Price was overheard singing in the rehearsal hall by Mariah Carey while everyone else was on a meal break. Price was later introduced to Carey's husband, Sony Columbia's then CEO Tommy Mottola, and was offered a job as a background singer for Carey, which she accepted until 1997.She released her second album, Mirror Mirror, in 2000 on the Def Soul imprint of Def Jam Records; Island and Def Jam had merged in 1999, with Price and labelmates Dru Hill being reassigned to Def Soul. Mirror Mirror featured the singles "You Should've Told Me" and the Grammy Award nominatedIn October 2005, Price recorded her first live gospel album. The This Is Who I Am album has been released on October 24, 2006, on her own label, EcclecticSounds Records. It debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Gospel Charts and peaked at No. 9 on the R&B album chart. Price was inducted as an honorary member of Sigma Gamma Rho sorority in July 2006. In early 2007, Price kicked off a tour with the 'Sisters in the Spirit 2007'.In 2006, she recorded the song "Why?" for the soundtrack Why Did I Get Married?, the film version of Why Did I Get Married? Priceless Secrets from The Soul of A Woman, in which Price created the role of Sheila alongside Tyler Perry who used the song titles and lyrical content of Price's hit recordings to develop the story. In early 2009, she was featured on Coko's gospel album entitled The Winner in Me on the track "Oh Mary". In June 2010, Price promoted her single "Tired" on The Jazz Joy and Roy syndicated radio show as "some of the best work of my career to date." The song was also featured in Tyler Perrys 2011 film Madea's Big Happy Family. On February 9, 2012, in a pre-Grammy party to celebrate Price's nominations, the singer sang "Jesus Loves Me" with Whitney Houston in what turned out to be Houston's last public performance two days before her death. In September 2009, it was announced she would be joining Deborah Cox and Tamia to form the super group The Queen Project. The women seek to empower women of all ages, races and backgrounds by doing a number of community service projects.In 2016, Kelly was included in multiple songs on rapper Kanye West's new album, The Life of Pablo. Kelly was a co-writer with American R&B singer K. Michelle, on her single Not a Little Bit which was released on January 22, 2016. It is the lead single from the singer's third studio album, More Issues Than Vogue.In September 2021, Price was declared missing as reported by TMZ. Her attorney later confirmed she was privately recuperating from a severe covid infection.


=== Legal issues ===
On July 16, 2010, a lawsuit was filed in a Texas federal court by Price against a nationally known prosperity ministry, New Light Church of Houston, et al. Other defendants in the case include New Light's pastor, I. V. Hilliard, wife, Bridget Hilliard and daughter, Preshea Hilliard. Price claims she wrote and copyrighted the tune, "Women Who Win," which New Light Church and three members of the Hilliard family used without permission in a church show, on DVDs, on a website and at a "Women Who Win" conference in Houston. The original court docket indicates that the involved parties continued to use the work in a variety of ways despite being refused license to use.
In 2018, a lawsuit was filed against Price and her Atlanta-based company, Sang Girl Productions, alleging that Price took $25,000 to perform at a fundraiser for a non profit organization and then did not attend. The lawsuit alleges that she did not return the $25,000 advance.


== Family ==
Price grew up in a second apartment in the Edgemere Projects in Far Rockaway, Queens. Her father died when she was nine years old. She resides in Atlanta, Georgia, and frequently visits Los Angeles. Price's grandfather is Jerome Norman, bishop and pastor of the Full Gospel Mission Church of God in Christ in Queens and Jurisdictional Prelate of the First Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Barbados since 1985 by the late Presiding Bishop J.O. Patterson. Her mother, Claudia (1951–2020), was the former musical director of the church. Price began singing in the church at the age of six; and due to her voice gained the nickname 'Little Mahalia Jackson'.In 2020, Kelly Price lost her grandfather to COVID-19.


== Breast cancer activism ==
In December 2000, Price donated $250,000 to fight breast cancer. She presented a check to Tony Martell of the T.J. Martell Foundation and Denise Rich of G&P Foundation For Cancer Research to help with the ongoing fight against breast cancer. Price donated the proceeds from her single "Love Sets You Free" which she recorded in January 2000. In April 1999, Price volunteered to showcase her fashion designs during a special charity gala and fashion show to help the National Breast Cancer Awareness Initiative raise money for breast cancer education for minority women. The previous year, in 1998, Price learned that both her mother and her mother-in-law had been diagnosed with breast cancer, which would later claim her mother-in-law's life.Price's mother was a survivor of inflammatory breast cancer and an activist in educating the public about the disease. She was the chairwoman of the seventh annual Sister to Sister Fitness Festival held in Dallas, Texas which was sponsored by the Celebrating Life Foundation. Claudia experienced pain in her breast in 1997, but said fear and a lack of insurance kept her from seeking immediate medical attention. Instead, she waited two years before seeing a doctor. While at work one day in 1999, her doctor called and said she had inflammatory breast cancer. Doctors gave her two months to live. She underwent chemotherapy, and the disease was in remission as of October 2006.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsSoul of a Woman (1998)
Mirror Mirror (2000)
One Family: A Christmas Album (2001)
Priceless (2003)
This Is Who I Am (2006)
Kelly (2011)
Sing Pray Love, Vol. 1: Sing (2014)
Grace (2021)


== Awards and nominations ==
AMFT AwardsAmerican Music AwardBillboard Music AwardsGrammy AwardMTV Video Music AwardSoul Train Music AwardSoulTracks Readers' Choice Awards


== See also ==
List of number-one dance hits (United States)
List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Kelly Price discography at Discogs
Kelly Price Interview with Benji Irby
Kelly Price at IMDb