Carlo Forlivesi (born 23 October 1971) is an Italian composer, performer and researcher.
Forlivesi was born in Faenza, Emilia-Romagna. He studied at Bologna Conservatory, Milan Conservatory and the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia of  Rome. He then joined IRCAM (Institute de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique) and subsequently DIEM (Danish Institute of Electroacoustic Music), Tokyo College of Music, and Northwestern University, with fellowships from the governments of Italy, Denmark, Japan, and the United States (Fulbright Commission).
His activity has mainly focused on new music in Europe, the United States, and Japan. Forlivesi has conducted extensive research in the field of traditional Japanese music and dance including the ethnic music of the Ainu. Beside contemporary music, he cultivates a particular interest in early music, which he studied and performed for several years.
Forlivesi has collaborated with first-class performers and received numerous awards. His music is regularly programmed by festivals and theatres worldwide. Several times nominated artist-in-residence, lecturer, workshop coach, and music–contest judge, Forlivesi's international stance is reflected in his eclectic output, which includes compositions for orchestra, choir, chamber music, dance, electronics, and traditional Japanese instruments as well as choreographies and written works.
He has been a lecturer at Sapporo University, and an AFAM professor at the Italian State Conservatories of Cagliari, Adria, Modena and Rodi.


== Discography ==
Monograph

Carlo Forlivesi: Silenziosa Luna – 沈黙の月 / ALM Records ALCD-76 (2008)
Carlo Forlivesi: Compositions / Tactus TC.970601 (2019)


== External links ==
Carlo Forlivesi Official Website
Staatliche Hochschule für Musik und Darstellende Kunst Stuttgart – Carlo Forlivesi
CEMAT, Rome – Carlo Forlivesi
SIMC – ISCM International Society for Contemporary Music – Carlo Forlivesi
CDMC, Paris – Carlo Forlivesi
Fulbright Visiting Scholar Directory – Music
THE TRADITIONAL MUSIC OF THE AINU – NEW APPROACHES AND FINDINGS Journal of Comparative Cultures – NO. 16. Sapporo University 2005, by Carlo Forlivesi