Cornelis Willem (Gordon) Heuckeroth (born 6 July 1968, Amsterdam) is a Dutch singer and television personality, known in The Netherlands by his nickname Gordon. Globally he is best known for several viral videos from the TV show Holland's Got Talent in which he made racist remarks about a Dutch-Chinese contestant.


== Singer ==

In 1990, Gordon came in third in the ESF Public National Final. In 1991 he had a Dutch number one hit with the single Kon ik maar even bij je zijn ('If I could be with you for just a while'). In 2003, Gordon again participated in the ESF Public National Final, finishing second after Esther Hart.
Gordon joined Dutch singers Gerard Joling and Rene Froger in a series of concerts under the name De Toppers. De Toppers represented the Netherlands at the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 in Moscow, Russia, but never made it to the final, finishing in seventeenth place in the semi-final. In 2009, Gordon left De Toppers. A few weeks later, Gordon rejoined De Toppers.


== Radio and television ==

From 2007 to 2008, Gordon had his own radio show on Radio 538.  On television, he was part of the jury of Idols Netherlands in 2007, X-Factor Netherlands in 2008, and Holland's Got Talent in 2010.


== Racist remarks ==
Gordon made multiple remarks to Dutch-Chinese contestant Xiao Wang on the TV show Holland's Got Talent in November 2013. Comments, mainly referring to Chinese restaurants, such as "Which number are you singing? Number 39 with rice?", "Surplise!", "He looks like a waiter from a Chinese restaurant", and "This is the best Chinese I've had in weeks, and it's not a takeaway", have been described as racist and highly offensive to those of Chinese and Asian heritage.Within a few days after the broadcast, the clip went viral online, and Gordon's comments drew heavy criticism on international media and social media outlets. The Amsterdam Discrimination Hotline ("MDRA") issued a letter to the show asking for an explanation of Gordon's behavior, and states that while humor and exaggeration are generally acceptable on a public platform, "there is a line that can't be crossed", and "the singer has the potential of influencing a large group". On 27 November 2013, the hotline filed an official complaint with RTL Nederland in regard to Gordon's treatment of Xiao Wang.Gordon initially responded that he "thinks jokes like that are acceptable and innocent", that he "is not a racist", and that he "does not feel the need to apologise". Performer Xiao Wang was quoted as saying that he "felt somewhat slighted" and "disliked the 'jokes'". Over time, Gordon reconsidered his position, and in February 2020, he publicly apologised for his remarks, vowing he would not let it happen again.Gordon: No More Chinese Jokes


== Other activities ==
In March 2021, Gordon presented a petition to Sander Dekker, caretaker minister of Legal Protection, calling for an identification requirement for social media accounts. He wanted an end to anonymous threats and homophobia that he and others had received. Dekker called it an interesting proposal that he'd take up with European colleagues.


== Discography ==
Kon Ik Maar Even Bij Je Zijn (CNR Music, 1992)
Alles Wat Ik Ben (1993)
Now Is The Time (CNR Music, 1994)
Kon Ik Maar Even Bij Je Zijn (2 CD; 1995)
Je Bent Wie Je Bent Schatje (1995)
De Tijd Van Mijn Leven (1996)
Omdat Ik Zo Van Je Hou (CNR Music, 1996)
Gordon & Re-Play (Dino Music, 2002) featuring Re-Play
Gordon & (Dino Music, 2003)
A Song For You (Rodeo Media, 2008)
Liefde Overwint Alles (Berk Music, 2013)
Compleet, Volmaakt, Het Einde (Berk Music, 2016) featuring Metropole Orkest


== References ==


== External links ==
(in Dutch) Gordon, official website
Article about Gordons discriminatory remark  'number 39 with rice' in BBC China