Emory Lee Gordy Jr. (born December 25, 1944, in Atlanta, Georgia) is an American musician, songwriter and music producer. 


== Early life ==
Gordy started his musical education by age four at the piano. At six he had begun to tackle the trumpet and would soon learn the banjo, euphonium, guitar, and ukulele. In high school Gordy divided his time and talents between string bands, Dixieland bands, and a top 40 garage band, honing his musical skills and learning to arrange music. After graduation, he continued his musical studies at Middle Georgia State University and later Georgia State University, performing French horn in the concert band.


== Career ==


=== Early years ===
Gordy began his career as a studio musician in Atlanta in 1964 when he was asked to fill in during a performance by Tommy Roe at a local concert. A week later he got the proverbial phone call; on the other end of the line was Joe South, an Atlanta-based record producer who had covered Roe on guitar alongside Gordy the week before.  Soon Gordy was working alongside Roe, Mac Davis, The Tams and Freddy Weller, as well as touring with Lou Christie, and Billy Joe Royal.  With Buddy Buie and J.R. Cobb, he is a co-writer on the Classics IV hit "Traces", listed as number 32 in BMI's Top 100 Songs of the Century. He also arranged Roy Orbison's "Walk On" and The Winston's "Color Him Father". 


=== Musician/touring ===
Gordy moved to Los Angeles in early 1970 and continued working as a studio musician.  Along with the studio work, he supplemented with engineering and production work for Debbie Reynolds and Liberace.  In 1971, he had the opportunity to tour as a bass player with Neil Diamond and played multiple instruments (including guitar, mandolin, percussion, and vibes) in the recording sessions that led up to Diamond's million-selling Hot August Night.In 1972, Gordy worked with Elvis Presley, playing bass on Separate Ways and Burning Love. He toured with Presley in 1973, playing bass for Elvis Presley's TCB Band. Later, along with fellow Presley band members James Burton, Glen D. Hardin and Ronnie Tutt, he accompanied Gram Parsons and Emmylou Harris on Parson's Grievous Angel album, released the year after Parsons's untimely death in 1973.In the mid-1970s, he was an original member of Emmylou Harris's Hot Band along with James Burton, Glen D. Hardin, John Ware, Rodney Crowell and Hank Devito. Remaining with Harris until 1977, Gordy continued to get calls from L.A. studios, where he played bass on projects by The Bellamy Brothers, Billy Joel and Tom Petty. Gordy would go on to play in Rodney Crowell and Rosanne Cash’s supergroup, The Cherry Bombs, alongside other soon-to-be Nashville luminaries: guitarist Richard Bennett, keyboard player Tony Brown and Vince Gill on guitar.By 1979 he joined John Denver’s band, touring the U.S., Australia and Europe and later composing the bass tracks for two of Denver’s albums. 
Gordy played on Phil Seymour's 1981 self-titled debut solo album for Boardwalk Records, including the hit single "Precious to Me". Gordy credits that involvement with Shelter Records and its owner Denny Cordell as a meaningful introduction to the rock genre.


=== Studio producer ===
Pivoting from major touring in 1983, Gordy became a staff producer at MCA Records Nashville, where he co-produced Steve Earle's seminal releases Exit 0 and Guitar Town with Tony Brown. Gordy also produced George Jones' Walls Can Fall , which won the CMA Vocal Event of the Year for I Don't Need Your Rockin' Chair, Bill Monroe's Southern Flavor, winning the first Grammy for Best Bluegrass Album and artists Nicolette Larson, Rider's In the Sky, Brenda Lee and his future wife, Patty Loveless.  Leaving MCA Records for independent production, Gordy produced Alabama's, In Pictures and Christmas Vol. II, Vince Gill's Turn Me Loose and The Things That Matter, and Aaron Tippin's You've Got To Stand For Something and Read Between the Lines for RCA Records. Other notable productions include Jimmie Dale Gilmore's Spinning Around The Sun for Elektra Records, Delbert McClinton's One Of the Fortunate Few for Rising Tide Records and Shawn Camp's 1995 for Warner Bros. Records. 
Gordy's abilities were put to the test in 1992, after his wife, Patty Loveless, left MCA, the label that had jump-started her on the path to becoming country music's most notable female neo-traditional vocalist and signed with Epic Records. Plagued by a vocal cord injury that threatened to cut her career short, Loveless was forced to disappear from view for several months while she underwent laser surgery and a period of recovery.  Gordy's work on Only What I Feel put his wife's career back on the fast track, and he did it by drawing on her strength as a traditional singer amidst a wave of "New Country" clones. Her subsequent release When Fallen Angels Fly  won the CMA Album of the Year in 1995, becoming only the second female winner in the history of the award. Gordy also produced Loveless' Grammy nominated Best Country Album Sleepless Nights and Grammy winner for Best Bluegrass Album Mountain Soul II for Saguaro Road Records.


=== Current activities ===
Active until the mid-2000s, today Gordy is now in semi-retirement and spends most of his time at his home northwest of Atlanta. He still writes, occasionally travels to Nashville as a studio musician for one of his friends, engineers vocals at his home studio, and is seen playing guitar at most of his wife's yearly Nashville appearances at the Grand Ole Opry  He is also an avid ham radio operator and third degree black belt in Karate.Gordy was inducted into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame in 1992. His wife, Patty Loveless joined him in the GMHOF in 2005. Gordy was named the first Alumni of the Year for Middle Georgia State University in 2015.


== Collaborations ==
Cold Spring Harbor - Billy Joel (1971)
Piano Man - Billy Joel (1973)
Serenade - Neil Diamond (1974)
Heart Like a Wheel - Linda Ronstadt (1974)
Streetlife Serenade - Billy Joel (1974)
Grievous Angel - Gram Parsons (1974)
Elite Hotel - Emmylou Harris (1975)
Just Wanna Rock 'n' Roll - José Feliciano (1975)
Karla Bonoff - Karla Bonoff (1977)
Carole Bayer Sager - Carole Bayer Sager (1977)One Of
I'm Glad You're Here with Me Tonight - Neil Diamond (1977)
Luxury Liner - Emmylou Harris (1977)
Ain't Living Long Like This - Rodney Crowell (1978)
Quarter Moon in a Ten Cent Town - Emmylou Harris (1978)
Blue Kentucky Girl - Emmylou Harris (1979)
John Denver - John Denver (1979)
Right or Wrong - Rosanne Cash (1979)
Light of the Stable - Emmylou Harris (1979)
But What Will the Neighbors Think - Rodney Crowell (1980)
Roses in the Snow - Emmylou Harris (1980)
Autograph - John Denver (1980)
Evangeline - Emmylou Harris (1981)
Shades - J. J. Cale (1981)
Cimarron - Emmylou Harris (1981)
Rodney Crowell - Rodney Crowell (1981)
Seven Year Ache - Rosanne Cash (1981)
Love Will Turn You Around - Kenny Rogers (1982)
Somewhere in the Stars - Rosanne Cash (1982)
We've Got Tonight - Kenny Rogers (1983)
Riddles in the Sand - Jimmy Buffett (1984)
The Ballad of Sally Rose - Emmylou Harris (1984)
High Country Snows - Dan Fogelberg (1985)
Last Mango in Paris - Jimmy Buffett (1985)
The Things That Matter - Vince Gill (1985)
Rose of My Heart - Nicolette Larson (1986)
Angel Band - Emmylou Harris (1987)
Lone Star State of Mind - Nanci Griffith (1987)
Sunday Morning to Sunday Night - Matraca Berg (1997)
All I Intended to Be - Emmylou Harris (2008)
Old Yellow Moon - Emmylou Harris, Rodney Crowell (2013)


== References ==