Timothy Rhea (born June 18, 1967) is an American conductor and the Director of Bands at Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas. Rhea is the conductor of the Texas A&M Wind Symphony and the director of the Fightin' Texas Aggie Band. Additionally, he is the administrative head of the instrumental music department and contributing composer and arranger for all Texas A&M Band Department Ensembles. As of March 2016, he is the President of the American Bandmasters Association. He previously served as the President-Elect prior to becoming the President of the association.


== Early life and education ==
Rhea was raised in De Kalb, Texas, and graduated from DeKalb High School in 1985. He received a Bachelor of Music Education with honors from the University of Arkansas, privately studying conducting under Eldon A. Janzen.
Later, he earned a Master of Music in Wind Conducting from Texas Tech University, where he studied with James Sudduth, served as an assistant conductor for the University Symphonic Band, and served as a graduate assistant director and musical arranger for the Texas Tech University Goin' Band from Raiderland.
In May 1999, Rhea received his Doctor of Musical Arts in Wind Conducting and Composition from the University of Houston.


== Tenure at Texas A&M ==

Rhea joined the Texas A&M University band staff in June 1993. In 1995, he was named conductor of the Texas A&M Symphonic Band, which would later be renamed as the Texas A&M Wind Symphony. Rhea eventually became the Director of Bands of Texas A&M on June 1, 2002.Rhea has conducted the Wind Symphony at the Texas Music Educators Association, the College Band Directors National Association, and the American Bandmasters Association conventions. Upon several occasions, he has toured with the band throughout the state of Texas, including performances at the Meyerson Symphony Center in Dallas, the Wortham Center in Houston, as well as San Antonio and Austin.He began conducting the Wind Symphony in Europe in 1999, subsequently returning in 2001, 2004, and 2007. Currently, under his direction, the band has performed concerts in England, Ireland, Austria, Germany, and the Czech Republic.
Timothy Rhea, with the Wind Symphony, has released a six volume march series, entitled "Legacy of the March"; a four volume band music album, "Wind Band Masterworks"; and, occasionally, live concert recordings.


=== Carnegie Hall ===
On February 22, 2008. Rhea took the Texas A&M Wind Ensemble to Carnegie Hall in New York City. Under his direction, the Wind Symphony performed Leonard Bernstein's "Overture to Candide", Gustav Holst's "First Suite in E-flat for Military Band", George Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" with Kathryn Woodard at the piano, Donald Grantham's "Southern Harmony", Percy Grainger's "Over The Hills And Far Away", Frank Ticheli's "Blue Shades", David F. Wilborn's newly-commissioned "Concertante Caprice", and John P. Sousa's "The Freelance March". Their encore was Sousa's "Stars and Stripes Forever".


== Composing ==
Rhea has composed and arranged over 300 works. Since the 1990s, Rhea has arranged for university and public school marching bands and served as a clinician and composer. Some of Rhea's commissions have been performed for the Texas Music Educators Association, the Texas Bandmasters Association, the College Band Directors National Association, the Cotton Bowl Classic, and the Tournament of Roses Parade. His works are published with TRN Music Publisher, RBC Music Publisher, and Arrangers' Publishing Company.


== Awards ==
In July 1999, Rhea was awarded the Outstanding Young Bandmaster of the Year for the state of Texas from Phi Beta Mu. Former president of Texas A&M University, Dr. Ray Bowen, presented Rhea with the President's Meritorious Service Award in 2000.


== Professional affiliations ==
American Bandmasters Association (As of 2006, the youngest inducted member; as of 2016, the President)
National Band Association (member of Board of Directors)
Texas Music Educators Association
Texas Bandmasters Association
College Band Directors National Association
Big 12 Band Directors Association
World Association of Symphonic Bands & Wind Ensembles
American Society of Composers, Authors, & Publishers
Phi Beta Mu
Phi Mu Alpha
Phi Kappa Phi
Pi Kappa Lambda
Kappa Delta Pi
Kappa Kappa Psi (Honorary member)


== References ==