Brian Francis Connolly (5 October 1945 – 9 or 10 February 1997) was a Scottish singer-songwriter, musician and actor, best known as the lead singer of glam rock band The Sweet between 1968 and 1979.


== Early life ==
Connolly was born in 1945 in Govanhill, Glasgow. His mother was a teenage waitress, Frances Connolly, who left him in a Glasgow hospital as an infant whilst he was possibly suffering from meningitis. The identity of his father was never made public. Connolly was fostered at the age of two by Jim and Helen McManus of Blantyre, South Lanarkshire and took their family name. After inadvertently discovering his lineage, he eventually reverted to the name Connolly. The McManuses were the family of Mark McManus, of Taggart fame. Both men perceived a resemblance between them, and supposed McManus's father to have also been Connolly's.In a radio interview, Connolly reported that singing was a large part of growing up since there was no television, and that he was regularly called upon to sing for family and friends. Connolly has credited the Everly Brothers as being his earliest musical influence.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
At the age of 12, Connolly moved to Harefield, Greater London, where he attended the local secondary modern school. In his mid-teens he joined the Merchant Navy, and got a tiger's head tattooed on his right arm during his Navy service. On his discharge from the Merchant Navy in 1963 he returned to Harefield and played in a number of local bands, including Generation X (not to be confused with the punk rock band from the late 70s, fronted by Billy Idol) from mid-1965 until about October 1966. The group recorded four tracks but these were not commercially released. The lineup featured Connolly on vocals, Chris Eldridge and Lee Mordecai on guitars, Mark Conway (bass) and drummer Martin Lass. Connolly eventually replaced singer Ian Gillan (later of Deep Purple fame) in a band called Wainwright's Gentlemen, which included drummer Mick Tucker.


=== Sweet (1968–1979) ===
Tucker and Connolly left Wainwright's Gentlemen in late 1967 and recruited guitarist Frank Torpey, and bassist Steve Priest, naming their new band The Sweetshop. On the eve of releasing their debut single, Slow Motion, in July 1968, the band shortened their name to The Sweet. They recorded a further three unsuccessful singles; Andy Scott joined the line-up in late 1970, just before the release of their first hit single "Funny, Funny." After this, Connolly was propelled into the limelight, with many appearances on Top of the Pops, with the other members of the Sweet.
In 1974, Connolly was badly beaten after leaving a nightclub in Staines where he received several kicks to his throat resulting in his being unable to sing for some time and permanently losing some of his vocal range. This incident also meant the band missed out on supporting The Who at Charlton Athletic Football Ground. Several songs on the Sweet Fanny Adams album had to be sung by other members of the band.
As time progressed issues between Connolly and other members of Sweet developed and he would find the band excluding him from decisions. Connolly developed a significant problem with alcoholism in the mid-1970s. During 1977, when no tours were undertaken and two of Sweet's most successful albums were recorded, the power struggle within the band became even more apparent. Connolly's chronic alcohol abuse further compromised his role with the band as his voice began showing the impact in recordings and on stage during Sweet's 1978 US tour. He played his last British show with the classic Sweet line-up at Hammersmith Odeon, London on 24 February 1978. His final live performance with the band was in July 1978 in Florida, US, when they supported Alice Cooper. His departure was not made public until March 1979.


== After Sweet (1979–1983) ==
After news of his leaving Sweet broke, Connolly was interviewed by the German music magazine Bravo, in which he said he was taking time off to be with his family, and considering a new musical direction (countrified rock). By mid- to late 1979 he had recorded a few new tracks at Chipping Norton Recording Studios, in Oxfordshire, with the assistance of friend and producer Mick Angus. One of the tracks "Take Away The Music" was re-recorded the following year, with then Polydor producer Pip Williams, at the Marquee Studios, in London.
Also in 1979 was Connolly's first major appearance since leaving the Sweet, at the Bravo Super Disco '79 event, held at the Olympiahalle in Munich on 22 June. Ten thousand people heard Connolly perform a sneak peek of his first solo Polydor single: "Take Away The Music". It was issued as Connolly's first solo single during 1980, by Polydor. This single is also included on the Polydor Germany High Life compilation album from 1980.
In 1981, Connolly was admitted to hospital with bloating, and he sustained multiple heart attacks. His health was permanently affected with some paralysis on his left side which would later develop into a nervous system condition. These problems were most likely related to Connolly's excessive alcohol consumption and heavy smoking, coupled with the use of prescription diuretic medicine.Connolly's next release was "Don't You Know a Lady", composed by Roger Greenaway, was also recorded by British four-piece band Brooks shortly after Connolly's release. Again the track failed to make an impact. In 1982 with his Polydor contract having expired, Connolly signed with French independent label, Carrere Records. Carrere then released the hard-rock single "Hypnotized", written by Joe Lynn Turner. A Fandango cover, the track was released in Europe with wide distribution by RCA but failed to chart. During this time Connolly recorded a dozen or so new tracks. The original plan was to have a completed album out by August 1983, but this never materialised.
During January 1983, Connolly supported Pat Benatar for three shows including one at Hammersmith Odeon, London. Connolly's Encore, included most of the members of Verity (fronted by ex-Argent guitarist John Verity) and Terry Uttley, bass player from Smokie. Songs played included "Windy City", "Fox on the Run", "Hypnotized" and new numbers, "Sick and Tired", "Red Hair Rage" and "Burning The Candle". These three tracks are available on a bootleg 7" single and CD. The band and Connolly also played two other dates for the Benatar tour in Birmingham and Newcastle. The Inland Revenue served Connolly and the other members of the Sweet with a multimillion-pound tax assessment for the income earned from their hit records. Connolly sold his house to pay his share of the tax bill.


=== New Sweet and reunions ===
From early 1984 onward, despite recurrent ill health, Connolly toured the UK and Europe with his band, now under the name of The New Sweet. His most successful concerts were annual appearances in West Germany, before and after Germany's reunification. He visited other countries including Denmark, and continued to perform sporadically in the UK. Connolly had reportedly stopped drinking in 1985 The same year Connolly separated from his wife Marilyn, divorcing in 1986.
During 1987, Connolly again encountered Frank Torpey, the original Sweet lead guitarist from 1968 to 1969. According to Torpey, Connolly was seeking a German recording deal. Torpey subsequently invited Connolly to go into the recording studio with him, as an informal project. Running very late, Connolly turned up and the track "Sharontina" was recorded, but would not be released until Torpey's 1998 album, Sweeter.
In 1988, Connolly reunited in Los Angeles, California, with former band members Mick Tucker, Steve Priest and Andy Scott, to rework studio versions of "Action" and "The Ballroom Blitz". This was to be a trial run, to see if a full reunion and new album could be arranged, for America's MCA Records. The Chapman-produced reunion floundered quickly due to problems with Connolly's voice. Connolly returned to The New Sweet. In 1990, he reunited with the original Sweet line-up for the promotion of a music video documentary in London at Tower Records.
By July 1990, plans were made for Connolly and his band to tour Australia. A number of dates were planned, with the tour starting in Adelaide, and proceeded during November. However, during the very long flight to Australia, Connolly's health had suffered and he was hospitalised temporarily in Adelaide Hospital, ostensiblyfor dehydration and related problems. The rest of the band played a show in Adelaide without him, so as not to disappoint the waiting fans. After several other shows, including one at the Dingley Powerhouse, Connolly and the band played the final Australian date of the tour at Melbourne's Old Greek Theatre. It was felt at the time that Connolly's health was sufficient reason for the tour not to be extended, and some of the later planned dates were abandoned. Connolly went back to England and his band appeared on The Bob Downe Christmas Show, on 18 December 1990.
During the early 1990s, Connolly played the European "oldies" circuit and occasional outdoor festivals in Europe with his band. Plans suffered a small setback on 22 March 1992, when a heavy-duty tape recorder was stolen from the band's van whilst at a gig in the Bristol Hippodrome with Mud. It contained demos of four new songs, totaling about 20 mixes.
Legal problems continued over use of the Sweet name between Connolly and Andy Scott. In something of a truce, both parties agreed to distinguish their group's name to help promoters and fans. The New Sweet became Brian Connolly's Sweet and Andy Scott's version became Andy Scott's Sweet. Connolly and his band continued to tour, both in the UK and Europe.
In 1994, Connolly and his band played in Dubai. He appeared at the Galleria Theatre, Hyatt Regency. He also performed in Bahrain. By this time, Connolly had healed the differences with Steve Priest and Mick Tucker, and was invited to the wedding of Priest's eldest daughter, Lisa. At the private function, for which Priest specially flew back to England, Priest and Connolly performed together.


=== Let's Go and solo work (1995–1996) ===
In 1995, Connolly released a new album, Let's Go, backed up with merchandising. His partner Jean, whom he had met a few years earlier, gave birth to a son that year. In 1995, Jean succeeded in locating Connolly's biological family. An aunt in Ontario, Canada, revealed that Connolly's true birth mother had died in 1989. She also informed him that he had a living brother and sister, whom he met up with in England.On 2 November 1996, British TV network Channel 4 aired a programme Don't Leave Me This Way, which examined Connolly's time as a pop star with The Sweet, the subsequent decline in the band's popularity, and the impact on the band members. The show revealed Connolly's ill health, but also that he was continuing with his concert dates at Butlins, where Connolly and his band had appeared a number of times on tour during the early 1990s.
Connolly's final concert was at the Bristol Hippodrome on 5 December 1996, with Slade II and John Rossall's Glitter Band Experience.


== Death ==

During January 1997, Connolly had another heart attack and he was hospitalised in Slough. After a week in hospital he discharged himself, but had to be readmitted the following week. This time there was little more that could be done. Connolly died around midnight of 9–10 February 1997, due to kidney failure, liver failure and repeated heart attacks. He was 51 years old.He was cremated after a ceremony at Most Holy Name Roman Catholic Church at Old Mill Road, Denham, Buckinghamshire, on 17 February 1997, and his ashes were scattered over the water by his daughters Nicola and Michelle. He was also survived by his ex-wife, Marilyn, and his one-year-old son Brian (born 26 May 1995 by his girlfriend Jean). Fans organised a memorial concert for Connolly at the Camden Palace in London on 11 October 1998. Money was raised for a plaque dedicated to Connolly at Breakspear Crematorium, Breakspear Road, Ruislip, Middlesex. It was unveiled on 9 February 2000.
In 2013, Connolly's son, Brian Jr., competed in the television talent show The X Factor.  Brian Jr.'s mother, Jean, married and now lives with a former band member, Glenn Williams, in Spain.


== Band members ==


=== Personnel ===
Brian Connolly BandBrian Connolly – lead vocals (1979–1984)
John Verity – guitar (1979–1984)
Chas Cronk – bass (1979–1982)
Tony Fernandez – drums, percussion (1979–1982)
Dave Lambert – guitar (1979–1982)
Brian Willoughby – guitar (1979–1982)
Clive Barrett – guitar (1982–1984)
Steve Rodford – drums, percussion (1982–1984)
Terry Uttley – bass (1982–1984)The New Sweet / Brian Connolly's Sweet
Lineups


== Discography ==


=== With Sweet ===


=== As Brian Connolly ===


==== Singles ====
"Take Away the Music" b/w "Alabama Man" (1980) – Polydor Records
"Don't You Know a Lady" b/w "Phone You"(1980) – Polydor Records
"Hypnotized" b/w "Fade Away" (1982) – Carrere Records, RCA Records


==== Albums ====
Brian Connolly and The Sweet – Greatest Hits (1986) – new recordings of Sweet singles – Success Records
Let's Go (1995) – Sweet re-recordings and three new post-Sweet tracks – Bam Records
Take Away the Music (2004) – compilation of solo singles and demos – Malibu Records


==== Appears on ====
Closed (Belgian psychedelic band) – guide vocals on "My Little Girl From Kentucky" and "Spider"
"Remember December" by Paper Dolls – backing vocals (1970)
 High Life 20 Original Top Hits (1980) Polydor Germany – Features "Take Away the Music"
Sweeter (1998) by Frank Torpey, CD Album – Notable for Brian Connolly's 1997 lead vocal track, "Sharontina" – Frankie Dean Records


=== List of songs ===


==== "Generation X" (aka The Troop) ====


==== "Wainwright's Gentlemen" ====


==== As Brian Connolly ====
The column Song list the song title; bold means released as a single.
The column Writer(s) lists who wrote the song.
The column Time shows its length.
The column Album lists the album the song is featured on.
The column Producer lists the producer of the song.
The column Year lists the year in which the song was released.


==== As Brian Connolly's Sweet ====
The "Old Sweet" material are new recordings.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Richards, Jane (28 October 1996). "Wrecked by rock 'n' roll". The Guardian. London. pp. A10–A11. ISSN 0261-3077. ProQuest 187833607. (subscription required)
Donegan, Lawrence (11 February 1997). "Glam rock singer dies". The Guardian. London. p. 5. ISSN 0261-3077. ProQuest 187941799. (subscription required)
"Rape Head: Jim Shellyn and the hopelessly devoted". The Guardian. London. 2 November 1996. p. D73. ISSN 0261-3077. ProQuest 187774910. (subscription required)
"Sweet". Encyclopedia of Popular Music. Oxford Music Online. (subscription required)
"Brian Connolly". The Times (65810). London. 11 February 1997. p. 19.
Riegel, Richard (May 1977). "Sweet: Give Us A Wink (Capitol)". Creem. (subscription required)
Kent, Nick (10 February 1973). "Sweet: The Sweet Soft Underbelly of Rock". NME. (subscription required)
Frith, Simon (November 1973). "Sweet: Sweet Notes". Creem. (subscription required)
Ross, Ron (August 1974). "Sparks vs. Sweet: The Battle for Britain". Phonograph Record. (subscription required)
Sperrazza, Gary (11 September 1974). "The Sweet: Sweet Fanny Adams (RCA)". Shakin' Street Gazette. (subscription required)
Sperrazza, Gary (February 1975). "Sweet: Desolation Boulevard". Phonograph Record. (subscription required)
Bell, Max (26 April 1975). "The Sweet: No Longer Unfashionable". NME. (subscription required)
Barnes, Ken (October 1975). "Sweet: Glitter Relics in America". Phonograph Record. (subscription required)
Salewicz, Chris (31 January 1976). "The Sweet: Top of the Pops". NME. (subscription required)
Charone, Barbara (28 February 1976). "Sweet: Give Us A Wink (RCA)". Sounds. (subscription required)
Tobler, John; Grundy, Stuart (1982). The Record Producers. (subscription required)
Thompson, Dave (28 February 1997). "The Sweet: As Sweet As It Was". Goldmine. (subscription required)


== External links ==
Biography at Hot Shot Digital
Brian Connolly in themusicsover.com
Brian Connolly in last.fm.
Brian Connolly in thedeadrockstarsclub.com