Aleksandar Josipović (born 15 January 1981) is a marketing and communication expert, an author and a former dancing champion.


== Biography ==
Aleksandar was born on 15 January in 1981. in Lazarevac, former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. His dancing career starts at age of 9, and during his career he won 9 national championships in ballroom dancing, he was a finalist in the Golden World Cup (England) and a semifinalist in the World Cup (Hungary). He has danced and performed for many royal families, as well as for some countries presidents.  Aleksandar is one of the most successful of dancers but also of the pedagogues in the world that come from Yugoslavia. He holds French and Serbian citizenship.


== Education and work ==
2000 - 2002. Mathematics Faculty of University of Belgrade
2005 - 2009. Centre national de la Danse, Paris, France
2006 - 2007. Postdoctoral studies 'Dance movement therapy', Codarts Academy, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
2008 - 2009. A diploma in Neuro-linguistic programming, UCSC, United States Along with his dancing career, Aleksandar has been working as a consultant and a marketing manager since 2002. He worked on projects in many fields such as media, fashion, show business, hosting, production, culture and education across France, Serbia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Netherlands, Finland, United States, Spain, Latvia, Russia, Italy, Belgium, and Austria.During the period from 2013-2015, he was appointed as the director of Professional Department and Training Process at National Foundation for Dance and has organized a number of international dancing seminars located in Serbia.


== Career ==
After having spent 11 years in dancing club in Lazarevac, in 2001. he receives an invitation to dance in China, in the French cabaret show programme called Paris Paradis. During the next year and with the support of a choreographer Clodet Wolker, he soon began to gather information on Moulin Rouge audition. He is accepted in famous cabaret after a three-hour audition and he had been performing as a soloist there for a decade. He is the only man from Serbia that has ever played on Moulin Rouge stage.He performed as master of ceremonies on Eurovision Song Contest 2008 second semi final.He was one of the judges in a show programme 'Dancing with the Stars' Living in Dubai since 2015. Aleksandar has been a very successful marketing director and a consultant.


== Books ==
Known as the author of numerous works in famous European lifestyle magazines, he is also an author of four books of which some are under the auspices of UNESCO, such as the first book in Serbia on topic of dancing pedagogy called, 'Let's dance -  new methods in dancing pedagogy, basics of dancing 'Are you up for a dance?' and 'Life's a game, so play smart'. He gave all the income from publishing his fourth book 'Secret body language'  for humanitarian cause for people who were imperilled due to floods that have occurred across Serbia and Bosnia in 2014.


== References ==


== External links ==
www.aleksandarjosipovic.com | Official web page