Edward Joel Kowalczyk (born July 16, 1971) is an American singer, songwriter, musician and a founding member of the band Live. After leaving Live in 2009, he launched a solo career. His first album, Alive, was released worldwide in June and July 2010. He rejoined Live in December 2016.


== Early life ==
Kowalczyk was born to a family of Polish descent. He grew up in York, Pennsylvania and attended William Penn Senior High School in the York City School District, where he met the other three members of what would become Live. His father was a teacher at the local Northeastern High School.


== Career ==
Ed Kowalczyk was the lead singer, lyricist, and main songwriter for the band Live from its formation until 2009, then rejoined the band in December 2016. In 2009, he left the band and the other three members issued a statement detailing what they felt were inappropriate actions by Kowalczyk. Kowalczyk was sued by the band, seeking damages and an injunction against using the name "Live". Ed rejoined the band in December 2016 after months of rumors.Following his departure from Live, Kowalczyk recorded his first solo album, Alive, which was released in 2010. In 2012, he recorded The Garden and in 2013 The Flood and the Mercy. In 2014-2016 he embarked on an extensive tour celebrating the 20th anniversary of Throwing Copper, playing acoustic concerts across the U.S., Europe and Australia.
Kowalczyk has worked with musicians Stuart Davis and Glen Ballard and singers Anouk, Neneh Cherry, Adam Duritz of Counting Crows, Red Wanting Blue, and Shelby Lynne. He featured on the song "Evolution Revolution Love," from the 2001 Tricky album Blowback. He collaborated with Chris Frantz, Jerry Harrison and Tina Weymouth (ex-Talking Heads, then performing as The Heads) on the song "Indie Hair" from their 1996 album No Talking, Just Head.He appeared in the David Fincher film Fight Club as a waiter who serves the characters of Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, his only film acting credit to date.


== Political activities ==
Kowalczyk performed John Lennon's "Imagine" with Slash in 2003 at "Peace on the Beach," a rally to protest the coming War in Iraq. In 2008, he appeared in a video with will.i.am from The Black Eyed Peas, John Legend, Scarlett Johansson, and Nick Cannon, supporting U.S. presidential candidate Barack Obama and appeared at campaign rallies for Obama with will.i.am.Kowalczyk is a member of Canadian charity Artists Against Racism and has worked with them on awareness campaigns.


== Discography ==

Solo studio albumsSolo extended playsSolo singles


== Songs in TV ==
"Evolution Revolution Love" (Tricky featuring Ed Kowalczyk) was used in the NBC series The West Wing in the episode "Manchester (Part 1)".
"The Great Beyond" was included on the soundtrack of the 2011 film Killing Bono.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website