Emery Reves (Hungarian: Révész Imre) (16 February 1904 – 4 October 1981) was a writer, publisher, and successful press and literary agent most notably for Winston Churchill and other prominent European statesmen who were predominantly anti-Fascist and held Democratic ideals.  He advocated that world federalism might bring peace to a post-war world.


== Youth ==
Reves was born in Bácsföldvár, Hungary, to Jewish parents and educated in Berlin, Zurich and Paris.


== Career as press and literary agent ==
In the 1920's, he became a freelance journalist, focusing on the League of Nations.  Statesmen including French Prime Minister Aristide Briand and Lord Robert Cecil, architect of the League of Nations, supported his desire to create an international news agency that would counter purely nationalistic viewpoints. 
Towards this end, around 1930, he founded the "Cooperation Press Service and Publishing Company", known for its internationalism, broad circulation, and strong anti-Nazi stance. He had to abandon his Press Service in Berlin after it was raided by Nazi Storm Troopers.  Fleeing Berlin at the age of 29, he reopened the office in Paris.  The company organized global publication of the views of over 120 European statesmen, including French statesmen Paul Reynaud, Prime Minister in 1940,   Leon Blum, Prime Minister in 1936, as well as British statesmen Foreign Minister Anthony Eden, a Prime Minister in 1956, and Labour Party Leader Clement Attlee, a Prime Minister in 1945.  All were strong opponents of appeasement with Mussolini's Italy or Hitler's Germany, at least in the years closely leading to the second World War, though Attlee had favored pacifism for a period.


== Work with Winston Churchill ==
In 1937, he befriended Winston Churchill, becoming his literary agent, and used his news agency, Cooperation Press Service, to place Churchill’s articles on current world events in major newspapers across Europe. Though Churchill's writing formerly cast a limited global presence, by 1939 Reves had helped place Churchill's work on the front pages of thirty newspapers, with 750 different outlets annually, representing approximately fifteen to twenty million readers in twenty-five languages. Referring to Reves in 1940, Churchill wrote to the British Minister of Information, “I can speak from personal experience of his altogether exceptional abilities and connections,” and characterized him as “a most brilliant writer” who “holds our views very strongly.”  Official Churchill historian, Sir Martin Gilbert, published an extensive record of correspondence between Reeves and Churchill from 1937-64, in his book Winston Churchill and Emmery Reeves.When Churchill was elected Prime Minister, Reves was sent to New York to help build up the British propaganda organization in both North and South America. In 1940 he was naturalised as a British subject. After the war, he purchased the rights to publish Churchill's war memoirs outside the United Kingdom and Churchill's extensive four volume History of the English-Speaking Peoples. Considered a risk at the time, both sold widely.  Other noteworthy and lucrative post war work included brokering the memoirs of Dwight D. Eisenhower, British Field Marshall Bernard Montgomery and other wartime leaders to newspapers and magazines.Earlier he published I Paid Hitler (1941), by Fritz Thyssen, writing that he considered German steel magnate Thyssen to be "one of the men most responsible for the rise of Hitler and for the seeking of power by the National Socialists in Germany", attributing Hitler's rise in part to the support of leading industrialists. Another pre-war work he commissioned was the controversial Conversations with Hitler, by Hitler's aide Herman Rauschning. Published in 1940 in the United States, the widely quoted book was a damning portrayal of Hitler as a madman bent on world conquest and destruction. Agreeing with some of the book's substance, but considering it an overzealous work of propaganda, several contemporary historians have questioned its authenticity, and written that many statements attributed to Hitler by Rauschning were simply invented or lifted from different sources.


== Widest selling work, Anatomy of Peace ==
His best known work, The Anatomy of Peace, published in 1945, helped popularize the cause of world federalism.  Reves argued for a federation of nations relinquishing to the federal authority only the powers to manage and regulate intergovernmental relationships, but still retaining sovereignty for each of the independent nations. The federation, most importantly, would have to have legislative powers to create international law. Reves argued that world law was the only way to prevent war and that the fledgling United Nations Security Council would be inadequate to preserve peace because it was an instrument of power, rather than an instrument of law. Likely his most widely read book, it sold more than 200,000 copies in England and was an American best-seller. In total, the book sold 800,000 copies in thirty languages. It was endorsed by Albert Einstein and numerous other prominent figures.The cover of the book had an "Open Letter to the American People", signed by Owen J. Roberts, J.W. Fulbright, Claude Pepper, Elbert D. Thomas, and other dignitaries, which began:

The first atomic bomb destroyed more than the city of Hiroshima. It also exploded our inherited, outdated political ideas.
A few days before the force of Nature was tried out for the first time in history, the San Francisco Charter was ratified in Washington. The dream of a League of Nations, after 26 years, was accepted by the Senate.
How long will the United Nations Charter endure? With luck, a generation? A century? There is no one who does not hope for at least that much luck- for the Charter, for himself, for his work, and for his children’s children. But is it enough to have Peace by Luck? Peace by Law is what the peoples of the world, beginning with our selves, can have if they want it. And now is the time to get it.He was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1950.


== Later life ==

From 1964 to his death, he was married to Wendy Russell, a former American fashion model active in New York and Paris, who had been his companion since 1948. Reves and Russell were married in 1964 in Thonex, Switzerland.  In 1954, the couple purchased a home in the French Riviera, Villa La Pausa, which had originally been constructed for fashion designer Coco Chanel. Churchill was a regular guest at La Pausa in the late 1950s, but his friendship with Emery and Wendy cooled, apparently due to Clementine Churchill's dislike of Wendy. A pained letter from Reves to Churchill in early 1960, refusing to invite him to La Pausa again, shows how bitterly estranged the former friends had become; Reves wrote openly about Wendy's struggle with depression and seemed to imply that Clementine, if not Winston himself, had been partly responsible for it.   
Though a naturalized British citizen, as an internationalist, he spent little of his life in the United Kingdom. He died in Switzerland on October 4, 1981,and is buried with his wife Wendy at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia.
He was an extensive collector of impressionist, post-impressionist and modern art, including works by Rodin, Cezanne, van Gogh, Monet, and Degas, renaissance jewelry, furniture, silver, porcelain, and carpets,  including many of Arabic and 16th Century Spanish design.  In 1985, Reves's widow, born in Marshall, Texas, established the Wendy and Emery Reves Collection at the Dallas Museum of Art, which 1,400 featured items from this collection, with a donation that stipulated the recreation within the museum of the 15,000-square-foot (1,400 m2) villa.  In 1989, Wendy Reves established the Reves Center for International Studies at the College of William & Mary to honor her late husband and his commitment to internationalism; the adjacent residence hall is also named for the couple.Wendy Reves's philanthropy included a donation of $2 million to the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center in Dallas, which features an entry arch named for Emery.In 1991, the Dallas Symphony Orchestra commissioned a piece called Anatomy of Peace in Reves's memory; it was composed by Marvin Hamlisch and orchestrated by Richard Danielpour.


== Works ==
A Democratic Manifesto. Jonathan Cape: London, 1943.
The Anatomy of Peace, Harper and Brothers, 1945.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Wendy and Emery Reves Collection at the Dallas Museum of Art
The www.winstonchurchill.org on Emery
Hungarian Dictionary of National Biography
The Wendy and Emery Reves Center for International Studies