Judith Marjorie Collins (born May 1, 1939) is an American singer-songwriter and musician with a career spanning seven decades. She is known for her eclectic tastes in the material she records (which has included folk music, country, show tunes, pop music, rock and roll and standards) for her social activism, and for the clarity of her voice. Collins is a Grammy Award-winning artist who has released 28 studio albums, four live albums, numerous compilation albums and four holiday albums.
Collins's debut album, A Maid of Constant Sorrow, was released in 1961, but it was the lead single from her 1967 album Wildflowers, "Both Sides, Now" – written by Joni Mitchell – that gave Collins international prominence. The single hit the Top 10 on the Billboard Pop Singles chart and won Collins her first Grammy Award for Best Folk Performance. She enjoyed further success with her recordings of "Someday Soon", "Chelsea Morning", "Amazing Grace", and "Turn! Turn! Turn!".
Collins experienced the biggest success of her career with her recording of Stephen Sondheim's "Send in the Clowns" from her best-selling 1975 album Judith. The single charted on the Billboard Pop Singles chart in 1975 and then again in 1977, spending 27 non-consecutive weeks on the chart and earning Collins a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Vocal Performance, Female, as well as a Grammy Award for Sondheim for Song of the Year.
In 2017, Collins's rendition of the song "Amazing Grace" was selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or artistically significant". In 2019, Collins scored her first #1 album on an American Billboard Chart with Winter Stories, a duet album with Jonas Fjeld featuring the Chatham County Line, at the age of 80.


== Early life ==

Collins was born the eldest of five siblings in Seattle, Washington, where she spent the first ten years of her life. Her father, a blind singer, pianist and radio show host, took a job in Denver, Colorado, in 1949, and the family moved there. 
Collins contracted polio at the age of eleven and spent two months in isolation in a hospital.


== Career ==


=== Beginnings ===
Collins studied classical piano with Antonia Brico, making her public debut at age 13, performing Mozart's Concerto for Two Pianos. Brico took a dim view, both then and later, of Collins's developing interest in folk music, which led her to the difficult decision to discontinue her piano lessons. Years later, after she became known internationally, she invited Brico to one of her concerts in Denver. When they met after the performance, Brico took both of Collins's hands into hers, looked wistfully at her fingers and said, "Little Judy—you really could have gone places." Still later, Collins discovered that Brico herself had made a living when she was younger playing jazz and ragtime piano (Singing Lessons, pp. 71–72). In her early life, Collins met many professional musicians through her father.It was the music of Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger and the traditional songs of the folk revival of the early 1960s, however, that kindled Collins's interest and awoke in her a love of lyrics. Three years after her debut as a piano prodigy, she was playing guitar. Her first public appearances as a folk artist after her graduation from Denver's East High School were at Michael's Pub in Boulder, Colorado and the folk club Exodus in Denver. Her music became popular at the University of Connecticut, where her husband taught. She performed at parties and for the campus radio station along with David Grisman and Tom Azarian.


=== 1960s ===
Collins eventually made her way to Greenwich Village, New York City, where she played in clubs like Gerde's Folk City until she signed with Elektra Records, a label she was associated with for 35 years. In 1961, Collins released her first album, A Maid of Constant Sorrow, at age 22.At first, Collins sang traditional folk songs or songs written by others – in particular the protest songwriters of the time, such as Tom Paxton, Phil Ochs, and Bob Dylan. She recorded her own versions of important songs from the period, such as Dylan's "Mr. Tambourine Man" and Pete Seeger's "Turn, Turn, Turn". Collins was also instrumental in bringing little-known musicians to a wider public. For example, she recorded songs by Canadian poet Leonard Cohen, who became a close friend over the years. She also recorded songs by singer-songwriters such as Eric Andersen, Fred Neil, Ian Tyson, Joni Mitchell, Randy Newman, Robin Williamson and Richard Fariña long before they gained national acclaim.Collins's first few albums consisted of straightforward guitar-based folk songs but in 1966, with In My Life, she began branching out to include works from such diverse sources as the Beatles, Leonard Cohen, Jacques Brel, and Kurt Weill. Mark Abramson produced and Joshua Rifkin arranged the album, adding lush orchestration to many of the numbers. The album was a major departure for a folk artist and set the course for Collins's subsequent work over the next decade.With her 1967 album Wildflowers, also produced by Abramson and arranged by Rifkin, Collins began to record her own compositions, beginning with "Since You've Asked". The album also provided Collins with a major hit and a Grammy award in Mitchell's "Both Sides, Now", which in December 1968 reached Number 8 on the Billboard Hot 100.

Collins's 1968 album Who Knows Where the Time Goes was produced by David Anderle, and featured back-up guitar by Stephen Stills (of Crosby, Stills & Nash), with whom she was romantically involved at the time.  (She was the inspiration for Stills's CSN classic "Suite: Judy Blue Eyes".) Time Goes had a mellow country sound and included Ian Tyson's "Someday Soon" and the title track, written by the UK singer-songwriter Sandy Denny. The album also featured Collins's composition "My Father" and one of the first covers of Leonard Cohen's "Bird on the Wire".Two Collins songs ("Who Knows Where The Time Goes" and "Albatross") were featured in the 1968 film The Subject Was Roses.


=== 1970s ===
By the 1970s, Collins had a solid reputation as an art song singer and folksinger and had begun to stand out for her own compositions. She was also known for her broad range of material: her songs from this period include the traditional Christian hymn "Amazing Grace", the Stephen Sondheim Broadway ballad "Send in the Clowns" (both of which were top 20 hits as singles), a recording of Joan Baez's "A Song for David", and her own compositions, such as "Born to the Breed".In 1971, Collins issued her second concert album, Living, and the compilation Colors of the Day: The Best of Judy Collins followed a year later. 1973's True Stories and Other Dreams found Collins in a contemplative mood, featuring an original song about a friend who took his own life ("Song for Martin") and another about the life of Che Guevara ("Che"). For 1975's Judith, Collins collaborated with producer Arif Mardin, who gave the album a sophisticated sound. Judith produced her biggest hit single with her mournful version of Stephen Sondheim's "Send in the Clowns", and it would become her best-selling record, eventually going platinum.
As Collins stepped up to a higher level of stardom, the longtime activist put political themes at the forefront of 1976's Bread and Roses. Political statements like the title song, originally a poem by James Oppenheim commonly associated with a 1912 garment workers strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts, were balanced with such pop compositions as Elton John's "Come Down in Time", but the album failed to achieve the commercial success of Judith. Following the release of the album, Collins underwent treatment for damaged vocal cords, and after years of struggling with alcoholism, she sought medical help to give up drinking. 1977's So Early in the Spring...The First 15 Years sold modestly.
Collins guest starred on The Muppet Show in an episode broadcast in January 1978, singing "Leather-Winged Bat", "I Know An Old Lady who Swallowed a Fly", "Do Re Mi", and "Send in the Clowns". She also appeared several times on Sesame Street, where she performed "Fishermen's Song" with a chorus of Anything Muppet fishermen, sang a trio with Biff and Sully using the word "yes", and even starred in a modern musical fairy tale skit called "The Sad Princess". She sang the music for the 1983 animated special The Magic of Herself the Elf, as well as the theme song of the Rankin-Bass TV movie The Wind in the Willows. In 1979, Collins returned to music with Hard Times for Lovers, a pop-oriented album in the same vein as Judith; she gained some extra publicity with the cover sleeve photograph of Collins in the nude. 


=== 1980s ===
Running for My Life (1980) and 1982's Time of Our Lives were well-crafted exercises in adult pop and soft rock, but as tastes changed, Collins's sales were on the decline. 1984's Home Again found her exploring some new musical avenues, including a synth-based cover of Yaz's "Only You" and a duet with country star T.G. Sheppard on the title cut. While the "Home Again" single was a minor hit, the album was not, and after 23 years, Collins and Elektra parted ways.

Collins traveled to England in 1985 and struck a one-off deal with Telstar Records to record the LP Amazing Grace, in which she re-recorded several of her better-known songs with an inspirational bent. In 1987, Collins signed with the independent Gold Castle label, and her first album for them, Trust Your Heart, pulled seven tracks from Amazing Grace and added three new selections. In 1989, Collins released two albums: a live disc titled Sanity and Grace, and a collaboration with clarinetist Richard Stolzman, Innervoices.


=== 1990s-2020s ===
In 1990, Collins released the album Fires of Eden under Columbia Records. The album spawned one single – "Fires of Eden", written by Kit Hain and Mark Goldenberg. The single peaked at No. 31 on Billboard's Adult Contemporary chart. At the time of its release, Collins performed the song live on several occasions, including on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson and The Joan Rivers Show. A music video promoting the song and featuring Collins was also released. Later, Cher recorded "Fires of Eden" for her 1991 album Love Hurts. Other memorable songs from Collins's Fires of Eden include "The Blizzard", "Home Before Dark" and a cover of The Hollies song – "The Air That I Breathe". 1990 also saw the release of a pair of children's albums, Baby's Morningtime and Baby's Bedtime.  Collins performed at President Bill Clinton's first inauguration in 1993, singing "Amazing Grace" and "Chelsea Morning". (The Clintons have stated that they named their daughter, Chelsea, after Collins's recording of the song.)For her next album, Collins turned to a project that was both personal and familiar, a set of Bob Dylan covers titled Judy Collins Sings Dylan: Just Like a Woman. Released in 1993, the album was a commercial success and reminded fans she was still active and in fine voice. In 1994, Collins issued her first Christmas album, Come Rejoice! A Judy Collins Christmas. It would prove to be the first in a series, with other holiday releases following in 1997 (Christmas at the Biltmore Estate), 2000 (All on a Wintry Night), and 2003 (Christmas). Collins combined her interests in music and literature for her next project. In 1995, she published a novel, Shameless, that took place against the backdrop of the music business; she also released an album of the same name that served as the soundtrack. 
In 1998, Collins published her third book, Singing Lessons: A Memoir of Love, Loss, Hope and Healing, which focused on her struggles with alcoholism, depression, and the emotional trauma of her son's death. 1999's Classic Broadway featured a collection of vintage show tunes. With help from her manager Katherine DePaul she founded Wildflower Records in 1999. Collins maintained a busy release schedule via Wildflower, issuing numerous live albums and reissues as well as new material such as 2005's Portrait of an American Girl, 2008's Bohemian, and 2010's Paradise, all of which focused on her continued strength as an interpretive vocalist. In 2006, she sang "This Little Light of Mine" in a commercial for Eliot Spitzer. Various artists, including Shawn Colvin, Rufus Wainwright and Chrissie Hynde, covered Collins's compositions for the tribute album Born to the Breed in 2008. In the same year, Collins released her own covers collection of Beatles songs, and she received an honorary doctorate from Pratt Institute on May 18. In 2010, Collins sang "The Weight of the World" at the Newport Folk Festival, a song by Amy Speace.2011 brought another memoir from Collins, Sweet Judy Blue Eyes: My Life in Music, which put its focus on her career as an artist. In July 2012, Collins appeared as a guest artist on the Australian SBS television programme RocKwiz. Collins paid homage to some of her favorite songwriters as well as her favorite vocalists with the 2015 album Strangers Again, which featured duets with Willie Nelson, Jackson Browne, Jeff Bridges, and Glen Hansard. The album also included a track with singer and songwriter Ari Hest. Collins and Hest joined forces again in 2016 for a full album titled Silver Skies Blue. In 2017, Collins returned to the work of the songwriter who gave her "Send in the Clowns" with A Love Letter to Stephen Sondheim, and the same year, she and her longtime friend Stephen Stills collaborated on an album, Everybody Knows. In addition to the two albums, she bared her soul in another book, Cravings: How I Conquered Food, where she opened up about her difficult relationship with food and her years of dealing with eating disorders. In 2019, Collins released the LP Winter Stories, a collaboration with Norwegian singer Jonas Fjeld and the North Carolina country-folk quartet Chatham County Line.
Collins joined the judging panel for the 7th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th and 14th Annual Independent Music Awards.
Collins was among hundreds of artists whose material was destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire.


== Activism ==
Like many other folk singers of her generation, Collins was drawn to social activism. Her political idealism also led her to compose a ballad entitled "Che" in honor of the 1960s Marxist icon Che Guevara.Collins sympathized with the Yippie movement and was friendly with its leaders, Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin. On March 17, 1968, she attended Hoffman's press conference at the Americana Hotel in New York to announce the party's formation. In 1969, she testified in Chicago in support of the Chicago Seven; during her testimony, she began singing Pete Seeger's "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?" and was admonished by prosecutor Tom Foran and judge Julius Hoffman.In 1971, Collins signed her name to a Ms. campaign, "We Have Had Abortions", which called for an end to "archaic laws" regarding abortion rights; the campaign encouraged women to share their stories and take action. In 1982, she wrote the song "Mama Mama" about a mother of five and her ambivalence over her decision to abort an unintended pregnancy.In the late 1990s, she was a representative for UNICEF and campaigns on behalf of the abolition of landmines.Later songs include "River of Gold" about the environment and "My Name Is Maria" about dreamers.


== Personal life ==
Collins has been married twice. Her first marriage in 1958 to Peter Taylor produced her only child, Clark C. Taylor, born the same year. The marriage ended in divorce in 1965. In April 1996, Collins married designer Louis Nelson, whom she had been seeing since April 1978. They live in Manhattan in New York City.In 1962, shortly after her debut at Carnegie Hall, Collins was diagnosed with tuberculosis and spent six months recuperating in a sanatorium.Collins is the subject of the Stephen Stills composition "Suite: Judy Blue Eyes", which appeared on the 1969 eponymous debut album of Crosby, Stills & Nash.Collins suffered from bulimia after she quit smoking in the 1970s. "I went straight from the cigarettes into an eating disorder", she told People magazine in 1992. "I started throwing up. I didn't know anything about bulimia, certainly not that it is an addiction or that it would get worse. My feelings about myself, even though I had been able to give up smoking and lose 20 lbs., were of increasing despair." She has written at length of her years of addiction to alcohol, the damage it did to her personal and musical life and how it contributed to her feelings of depression. Collins admits that although she tried other drugs in the 1960s, alcohol had always been her drug of first choice, just as it had been for her father. She entered a rehabilitation program in Pennsylvania in 1978 and has maintained her sobriety ever since, even through such traumatic events as the death of her only child, Clark, who died by suicide in 1992 at age 33 after a long bout with clinical depression and substance abuse. Since his death, she has also become an activist for suicide prevention.


== Awards and recognition ==


=== Academy Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===
Stephen Sondheim won the 1976 Grammy Award for Song of the Year based on the popularity of Collins's performance of "Send in the Clowns" on her album Judith.


=== Other awards ===
For her activism and musical abilities, the Americana Music Association presented Collins with the "Spirit of Americana"/Free Speech Lifetime Achievement Award at their 2005 Honors & Awards ceremony.
She was inducted into the Colorado Women's Hall of Fame in 2006
She was received an Honorary Doctor of Fine Arts Degree from Pratt Institute in May 2009
In 2009, Collins received the Lifetime Achievement Award at the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards.
Collins's rendition of the song "Amazing Grace" was selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or artistically significant" in 2017.
Collins received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 2019.


== Discography ==


== Charted singles ==


== Filmography ==
Baby's Bedtime (1992)
Baby's Morningtime (1992)
Junior (1994), as the operator of a spa for pregnant women
"Christy" (1994-1995), recurring role as "Aunt Hattie McHone"
Christmas at the Biltmore Estate (1998)
A Town Has Turned to Dust (1998; a telefilm based on a Rod Serling science-fiction story)
The Best of Judy Collins (1999)
Intimate Portrait: Judy Collins (2000)
Judy Collins Live at Wolf Trap (2003)
Wildflower Festival (2003) (DVD with guest artists Eric Andersen, Arlo Guthrie, and Tom Rush)
Girls (TV, 2013), series 2, episode 8: "It's Back"
Danny Says (2016)


== Bibliography ==
Trust Your Heart (1987)
Amazing Grace (1991)
Shameless (1995)
Singing Lessons (1998)
Sanity and Grace: A Journey of Suicide, Survival and Strength (2003)
The Seven T's: Finding Hope and Healing in the Wake of Tragedy (2007)
Sweet Judy Blue Eyes: My Life in Music (2011) ISBN 0-307-71734-8 OCLC 699763852


== RIAA certifications ==


== See also ==
List of peace activists


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Audio interview with Judy Collins
Audio interview, Minnesota Public Radio 7 April 2009
Judy Collins at IMDb
Judy Collins profile (#549)