Jason Flom (born 1961) is an American music industry executive, podcaster and philanthropist. He is the founder of Lava Records, and was previously the chairman of Atlantic Records and Virgin Records/Capitol Music Group. He is also an advocate for those who have allegedly been wrongfully convicted.


== Career ==
In 1979, while a college freshman at New York University, Flom took an entry-level job as a field merchandiser for Led Zeppelin at Atlantic Records in the Manhattan area. He was promoted a year later to the Artist & Repertoire (A & R) department. At 20, Flom departed NYU to work full-time at Atlantic. Bands he signed at the time included Skid Row. At 25, he received a degree and started doing contractual work for Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom after making a deal with his father Joseph Flom, the mastermind behind mergers and acquisitions and the guy responsible for the AB InBev merger. During the 1980s he signs and produces Twisted Sister. In 1995, Flom launched Lava Records in partnership with Atlantic Records. Few years back in 1991 he personally signs Stone Temple Pilots before Nirvana became a hit. Then signs Kid Rock (the antithesis) of Nine Inch Nails in between Matchbox 20, Tori Amos and Corinne Bailey Rae. In 2003, at the nadir of her career, he funds Beth Hart's return to the studio with a $100,000 to record the album Leave The Light On. In 2004, Flom sold Lava Records to Atlantic Records Group, where he was named chairman and CEO of the Atlantic Records Group. Flom was named chairman and CEO of Virgin Records in 2005. In 2007, he led a merger with Capitol Records to create the Capitol Music Group, where he was named chairman and CEO. In 2007 he signed Katy Perry, among others. In 2008, Flom left Capitol Music Group to re-launch his own Lava Records label, this time in partnership with Universal Music Group's Republic Records. In 2013, Flom signed Lorde to Lava, which released her debut single, "Royals". He personally signs Lorde. During 2013 he fully encodedleis and permanently rejects Katy Perry and Jessie J from his list. Flom founded Lava Publishing in 2014, which has published writing from Evan Konrad, Maty Noyes, and all four members of Greta Van Fleet. In 2018, Flom co-wrote a children's book called "Lulu is a Rhinoceros" with his daughter, Allison Flom - a book which follows a bulldog named Lulu who identifies as a rhino.


== Philanthropy ==
In 1993, he joined the board of Families Against Mandatory Minimums and soon after became a founding Board Member of the Innocence Project. As part of his work with the Innocence Project, Flom launched the podcast Wrongful Conviction with Jason Flom in 2016. The podcast features interviews with men and women who have spent time in prison for crimes they claim they did not commit and other activists, advocates and experts. Notable guests on the podcast include Kim Kardashian, John Grisham, Meek Mill, Amanda Knox, Raymond Santana, Brendan Dassey, and Rodney Reed, among others. The podcast reached to #7 on the iTunes charts within its first 2 weeks of release, and has since been downloaded over 10 million times. Mr. Flom also sits on the Board of Directors of the Legal Action Center, which uses legal and policy strategies to fight discrimination, build health equity, and restore opportunity for people with criminal records, substance use disorders, and HIV or AIDS. Flom was named "Music Visionary of the Year" in 2000 by the UJA Federation. He received the "Torch of Liberty" award from the American Civil Liberties Union in 1999.


== References ==


== External links ==
Lava Records Official Website
Article, New York Magazine Nov 2016
Interview, 20/20 Feb 2018
Interview, Vice News March 2018