Kevin Michael Griffin (born October 1, 1968) is an American singer, songwriter, and record producer. He is best known as the lead vocalist of the American rock band Better Than Ezra.His songs have been performed and recorded by artists such as Taylor Swift, Train, Sugarland, James Blunt, Dierks Bentley, The Record Company, Wilder Wood, Moon Taxi, Saint Motel, Andy Grammer, Christina Perri, Trombone Shorty, Howie Day, Barenaked Ladies, Tom Morello, Boys Like Girls, Blondie, Chase Rice, The Struts, Andrew McMahon, Matt Nathanson, Meat Loaf, Missy Higgins, and many others.
Griffin also works in music publishing, artist management, and lectures internationally on the subject of creativity to companies and organizations such as Live Nation, Which Wich, Novation, and YPO-WPO. His first book will be released in Fall 2022.
He is a co-founder and partner of the Pilgrimage Music & Cultural Festival in Franklin, Tennessee. Rolling Stone’s review of the festival’s inaugural year, was positive, saying it had “an A-list lineup (arguably the best curated of the year)”  and “established itself as a festival to watch.”  Performers at the festival have included Justin Timberlake, The Foo Fighters, Willie Nelson, Chris Stapleton, The Killers, Dave Matthews, Maren Morris, The Black Keys, Cage The Elephant, and Black Pumas.Griffin formed the alternative rock band Better Than Ezra in 1988. The band had platinum success in the 1990s with hits such as "Good", "In the Blood", and "Desperately Wanting", and has continued in the 2000s with hits such as "Extra Ordinary", "A Lifetime", and "Juicy". They continue to tour and produce new recordings, the most recent of which is All Together Now, released in September 2014. As a singer and performer, Griffin is known for singing in falsetto, inviting audience members onstage to play guitar, and interrupting his own songs with verses of well-known rock songs. He is a skilled mimic, imitating singers such as Aaron Neville, Bruce Springsteen, and Dave Matthews.His first solo album, Anywhere You Go, was released on October 4, 2019. Griffin also performs as part of Ezra Ray Hart with Mark McGrath of Sugar Ray and Emerson Hart of Tonic.


== Personal life ==
Griffin was born in Atlanta, Georgia and grew up in Monroe, Louisiana where he attended River Oaks High School. He received a bachelor's degree in English and a minor in political science from Louisiana State University in 1990. He was a member of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity. He took the LSAT with the intention of attending law school and working in entertainment law. Griffin took a job with Creative Artists Agency in Los Angeles during the early 1990s, before Better Than Ezra achieved commercial success.
Griffin and his family largely resided in the Uptown neighborhood of New Orleans until Hurricane Katrina devastated the city in 2005. He purchased a home in the Silver Lake neighborhood of Los Angeles in July 2006, and in 2011 he sold his house and moved to Franklin, Tennessee with his family.


= Current =
Kevin has produced, written, and co-written platinum albums and songs that have sold more than 30 million copies.He has had 11 songs in the Top 40 charts.
His songs have been streamed more than a billion times.
Kevin’s first number one with Better Than Ezra for their song “Good” in 1995. It was on top of the Alternative Chart for seven weeks. It reached No. 1 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart, No. 3 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart, and No. 30 on the Billboard Hot 100.His other number one songs were Howie Day’s “Collide”; and Sugarland’s “Stuck Like Glue” in 2011, which became the 11th most downloaded song in country music history.
In 2010, his song “Breathless” was covered by Taylor Swift at the Hope For Haiti telethon, which was the most widely distributed telethon in history.Kevin has won numerous BMI pop and country awards  and his song “Scar” with Missy Higgins won Song of the Year at the Australian ARIA Awards. The song is over 10x platinum.
He has four BMI “Million Air” Awards.
In 2018, Kevin was an adjunct professor at NYU’s Clive Davis School of Recorded Music. Currently, he serves on the GRAMMY’s Songwriter and Composer Wing Committee.
As a music publisher, he has co-published Florida Georgia Line’s No. 1 song “May We All” and Morgan Wallen’s No. 1 song “Chasin’ You.”
He is active with Better Than Ezra’s foundation, MusiCares, and St. Jude. In 2020, through a series of livestream acoustic performances, he was able to raise more than $220K for various charities helping those adversely affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic.


== Songwriting credits ==
Griffin has also produced, written, and co-written songs for other artists, such as Sugarland, James Blunt, Christina Perri, Taylor Swift, Train, Howie Day, Missy Higgins, Daniel Powter, Augustana, Debbie Harry, and Josh Radin. Griffin is credited with having co-written "Stuck Like Glue", the Mediabase #1 single from the 2010 Sugarland album, The Incredible Machine, as well as their subsequent single "Tonight".  Most recently, Griffin co-wrote Tristan Prettyman's top ten single,  "My Oh My".  He also co-wrote and co-produced James Blunt's "I'll Be Your Man" from his recent Some Kind of Trouble album.  Griffin co-wrote the Top 40 hit "Collide" with Howie Day.  He also co-wrote four tracks on Missy Higgins' debut album, The Sound of White, which included the hit "Scar." The album went ten times platinum in Australia.  Griffin also co-wrote Tristan Prettyman's single "Madly," and "Avalanche" on the self-titled, major-label debut of American Idol winner David Cook. Other recent artists Griffin has worked with include The Secret Sisters, A Rocket to the Moon, Boys Like Girls, Megan and Liz, Skillet, Shinedown, and Hot Chelle Rae. He co-wrote three songs with Barenaked Ladies frontman, Ed Robertson, on their 2013 album Grinning Streak, two songs on their 2015 album Silverball, and four on their 2017 album Fake Nudes.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website