Margaret Ellen Throsby AM (born 3 October 1941) is an Australian radio and television broadcaster. She has interviewed thousands of notable people for Australian Broadcasting Corporation programs throughout her career and is sometimes nicknamed "The Velvet Throat".


== Early life and career ==
Throsby was born in Neutral Bay, a lower north shore suburb of Sydney. Her father was Charles Throsby, an English barrister who died when she was 12, and her mother was Alison Battarbee, a cellist with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra. She attended North Sydney Girls High School, then spent a year studying speech pathology after leaving school.Her association with the ABC began when she joined its announcing staff in 1967. Since then she has overcome major barriers to the accepted roles for women in broadcasting. On 15 October 1975 she became the first woman to read national radio news since World War II, and in 1978 she was the first woman to present national television news. She has presented a variety of music and current affairs programs and won a devoted audience for her high-rating morning program, The Margaret Throsby Show, on ABC's Radio 2BL.
In 1989 she was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) for her services to broadcasting.In 1993 her ABC contract was not renewed due to her having made a series of advertisements for Macquarie Bank. She was replaced by Jennifer Byrne for nine months before being invited back to fill in for Geraldine Doogue.She presented ABC Classic FM's Mornings program from 1994 to 2011. Each morning an hour was devoted to an interview with notable guests interspersed with some of their own musical choices. From 2012 to 2016, the interview was broadcast at noon with the program being known as Midday. In 2017, her program was on Saturday mornings from 9 am to 12 pm, when she co-presented with a guest presenter who talked about their love of classical music. In October of that year, it was announced that her program would no longer be aired, but she would continue to present concerts broadcast on ABC Classic FM.Since November 2019 and as of February 2021 Throsby presents The Margaret Throsby Interviews at 10am on Mondays on Classic FM.


== Personal life ==
Throsby is the sister of David Throsby, a cultural economist, and Adrienne Bennett, formerly executive director of the Australian Psychological Society.She has been married and divorced three times. From her first marriage she had a son, Timothy Marc, who died in a motorbike accident in Thailand in 1996. From her second marriage, to John Buttsworth, a psychiatrist and art and furniture dealer, she is the mother of the musician Holly Throsby. Her third marriage was to Graham McCarter, a Scottish photographer. She also has a stepdaughter, Caitlin.


== Awards ==
Member of the Order of Australia
Variety Club of Australia's Radio Award
Two Avion Awards for the best in the world in-flight programs (Qantas)
Golden Gavel Award presented by the Law Society of New South Wales for "Excellence in Legal Reporting"
Children's Week Award for Services to Children – Media Award
Rostrum Speaker of the Year


== References ==


== External links ==
Throsby biography
Throsby's radio show
Margaret Throsby on Twitter
Throsby, Margaret (1941–) in The Encyclopedia of Women and Leadership in Twentieth-Century Australia