Steven Scott Harwell (born January 9, 1967) is a retired American musician who was the former lead vocalist for the rock band Smash Mouth. He and bassist Paul De Lisle were the only two constant members of the band until his retirement.


== Career ==
Greg Camp formed Smash Mouth with Harwell, Kevin Coleman, and Paul De Lisle. Harwell was previously a rapper in F.O.S. Harwell was a featured cast member in the sixth season of the reality show on VH1, The Surreal Life, in 2006. He has appeared on other television and radio shows, as well as making a cameo in the 2001 film Rat Race.
He also performed two songs, "Beside Myself" and "Everything Just Crazy", for the 2013 South Korean-Chinese animated film Pororo, The Racing Adventure. On August 27, 2016, during a performance with Smash Mouth in Urbana, Illinois, Harwell collapsed on stage and was taken by ambulance to a hospital. The band completed the concert without him, with De Lisle taking over on vocals.In October 2021, the band performed at a beer and wine festival in Bethel, New York where Harwell appeared to be intoxicated, threatening audience members and performing what looked like a Nazi salute. Following the performance, Harwell announced his retirement due to ongoing health issues.


== Personal life ==
Harwell had a son named Presley who died in July 2001 from acute lymphocytic leukemia at the age of 6 months. Subsequently, Harwell created a medical research fund in Presley's name. In 2010, he appeared on Food Network's Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives at the Meal Ticket Restaurant. Harwell attended Blackford High School, San Jose, California, renamed to Boynton High School in 2002.
In 2013, Harwell was diagnosed with cardiomyopathy, heart failure, and Wernicke encephalopathy. Wernicke encephalopathy is a neurological disease caused by thiamine deficiency typically associated with chronic alcoholism. It can affect motor functions, speech and memory. Harwell implied he retired because these problems hindered his ability to perform well.


== References ==


== External links ==
Steve Harwell at IMDb