Richard "Richie" Hawtin (born June 4, 1970) is a British-Canadian electronic musician and DJ. A three-time DJ Awards winner, he became involved with Detroit techno's second wave in the early 1990s, and has been a leading exponent of minimal techno since the mid-1990s. He became known for his recordings under the Plastikman and F.U.S.E.  aliases. Under the latter, he released his debut album Dimension Intrusion (1993) as part of Warp's Artificial Intelligence series.
In May 1990, Hawtin and John Acquaviva founded the Plus 8 record label, which they named after their turntable's pitch adjust function. In 1998, Hawtin launched M-nus Records. In summer 2012, Hawtin first presented ENTER., his experimental event at Space in Ibiza. In 2016, Hawtin launched his own technology company called PLAYdifferently, and released the MODEL 1 mixer, co-designed with Andy Rigby-Jones.


== Biography ==


=== Personal life ===
Hawtin was born in Banbury, Oxfordshire, England, and at the age of nine moved with his parents to LaSalle, Ontario, a suburb of Windsor, Ontario, where he was raised before spending time in Detroit, MI. His father worked as a robotics technician at General Motors and was a fan of electronic music, introducing his son to Kraftwerk and Tangerine Dream at an early age. He has one brother, Matthew, who is a visual artist and ambient music DJ. Hawtin attended Sandwich Secondary High School in LaSalle.


=== Early beginnings ===
He began to DJ in clubs in Detroit at 17, and his early style was a mix of house music and techno. With Canadian DJ John Acquaviva he formed the label Plus 8 in 1989 to release his own tracks under the name F.U.S.E. He dropped out of the University of Windsor, where he was studying film, and Plus 8 went on to release material by artists such as Speedy J and Kenny Larkin. Hawtin adopted his 'Plastikman' incarnation in 1993, releasing the single "Spastik" and parent album Sheet One, going on to release a number of albums and touring a live show for the next decade.


== Music career ==
Hawtin was among pioneers of the Minimal techno movement that emerged in the early 1990s, where he represented a "second wave" of American producers, such as Daniel Bell, Robert Hood, Jeff Mills, Carl Craig, Kenny Larkin, and Mike Banks, associated with Detroit techno.In 1996, Hawtin released a series of monthly 12-inch singles, entitled Concept 1, which, alongside the work of Robert Hood and other producers, explored minimal techno. His M-nus label also pursued this direction. In 1999, the Decks, EFX & 909 mix album, the first in a series of three, included 38 tracks molded via effects and drum machines.
In 2001, Hawtin performed at Life Fest in Windsor. He spent part of 2002 and 2003 living in New York City, before opening a label in Berlin, Germany, where he focused on his M-nus label, developing the careers of DJ-producers such as Magda, Gaiser, Hearttrob and Troy Pierce.
In 2006, he collaborated with choreographer Enzo Cosimi on a composition called "9.20" for the Winter Olympics opening ceremony. He said, "Enzo and I are very much interested in pushing boundaries, both as artists and for our audiences. Working together for the Opening Ceremonies of the Winter Games delivers the creative endeavor to not only entertain a huge audience, but to also introduce them to sights and sounds that they may have never experienced before."In 2012, Hawtin worked with Loco Dice and Ean Golden in promoting Electronic Dance Music on a tour of North American universities entitled CNTRL: Beyond EDM, which included music production seminars, lessons in the music business and live music performances.In July 2015, Hawtin was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Music Technology by the University of Huddersfield.Hawtin composed and scored music for the XXth Olympic Winter Games Opening Ceremony and 1928 silent French film Brumes d’automne.


=== Recordings ===
Hawtin has recorded music under the aliases Plastikman, F.U.S.E., Concept 1, Forcept 1, Circuit Breaker, Robotman, Chrome, Spark, Xenon, R.H.X., Jack Master, Richard Michaels and UP!.
He also recorded and performed, in combination with other artists, under group names such as The Hard Brothers, Hard Trax (with his brother Matthew Hawtin), 0733, Cybersonik (with Daniel Bell and John Acquaviva), Final Exposure (with Joey Beltram and Mundo Muzique), Just For Fun (with Holger Wick), Narod Niki (with Akufen, Cabanne, Dandy Jack, Daniel Bell, Luciano, Ricardo Villalobos, Robert Henke and Thomas Franzmann), Two Guys In The Basement (with John Acquaviva), Spawn (with Fred Giannelli and Daniel Bell) and States Of Mind (with Acquaviva).
Hawtin and Pete Namlook collaborated to produce the From Within series of albums which blend minimal techno and ambient.
He has also released a mix CD Sounds of the Third Season with Sven Väth.Slices magazine launched a series of biographies in 2007 called "Pioneers of Electronic Music"; their first issue was a 60-minute biographical documentary on Hawtin. The film follows his career from his early days crossing the border to Detroit to his current life in Berlin, and contains interviews with many colleagues and family members.
2011 saw the release of Arkives 1993 - 2010, a massive box set containing everything Hawtin has released under his Plastikman moniker, as well as a new mixed set and previously unreleased material. The collection includes CDs, vinyl, digital downloads and a DVD.
In November 2013, Hawtin performed as Plastikman at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City. The recording of this show was included in EX album, which was released digitally on June 10, 2014 followed with a CD release on July 15, 2014 .On December 11, 2015, Hawtin released a fifteen-track LP titled From My Mind To Yours to commemorate the 25 year anniversary of his record label Plus 8. The album consists of all new tracks from his various aliases such as Plastikman, F.U.S.E., Robotman, R.H.X., and Circuit Breaker. In its first week, it reached the top 20 in the UK dance album charts.Other Hawtin's collaborations include an installation performance in the Grand Palais in Paris with Anish Kapoor in 2011, Not Abstract II exhibition at the Gagosian Gallery in New York with German artist Andreas Gursky, and an audiovisual installation at 180 The Strand in London under his F.U.S.E. alias alongside his brother Matthew Hawtin, among others.


== Entrepreneurship ==
Hawtin co-founded Plus 8 Equities, a music technology fund along with John Acquaviva, Rishi Patel, Ben Turner and Pete Tong, where Hawtin serves as chairman. According to Billboard, the funds main goal is to advance music technology and collaborate with the startups engaged in developing new technologies able to advance music industry". Hawtin's established his own music technology company, called PLAYdifferently, in 2016. The first release was the MODEL 1 mixer, co-designed with the award-winning Andy Rigby-Jones. The mixer has been adopted by DJs such as Carl Cox, Jamie Jones, Loco Dice and many others.In 2014, Hawtin launched ENTER. SAKE, a sake brand in USA and Europe. The same year he was awarded a title of Sake Samurai.In 2016, Hawtin released his own proprietary DJ mixer called the PLAYdifferently MODEL1 with help from Andy Rigby-Jones, a former Allen & Heath engineer. Loco Dice, Nicole Moudebar, Chris Liebing and Dubfire were among the early ambassadors of the mixer.In 2019, Hawtin launched his CLOSER App, allowing fans to deconstruct the audio from his own live performances while toggling multiple camera angles of the performance.


== Selected discography ==


=== Albums ===
F.U.S.E. : Dimension Intrusion, 1993Plastikman: Sheet One, 1993Richie Hawtin: From Within, 1994 (with Pete Namlook)Plastikman: Recycled Plastik, 1994Plastikman: Musik, 1994Richie Hawtin: From Within 2, 1995 (with Pete Namlook)Plastikman: Sickness (EP), 1997Richie Hawtin: From Within 3, 1997 (with Pete Namlook)Concept 1: 96:CD, 1998Concept 1: 96:VR, 1998 (remixed by Thomas Brinkmann)Plastikman: Consumed, 1998Plastikman: Artifakts [bc], 1998Plastikman: Closer, 2003Plastikman to the power of 9: Kompilation, 2010Plastikman: Arkives 1993 - 2010, 2010Plastikman: EX, 2014 (UK Dance #16)Richie Hawtin: From My Mind To Yours, 2015F.U.S.E. Computer Space (25th Anniversary Edition), 2019Richie Hawtin: Time Warps (EP), 2020Richie Hawtin: Concept 1 (Digital), 2021


=== DJ mix compilations ===
Richie Hawtin: Mixmag Live!, 1995 (Live DJ mix album)Richie Hawtin: Decks, EFX & 909, 1999 (DJ mix album)Richie Hawtin: DE9: Closer to the Edit, 2001 (DJ mix album)Richie Hawtin and Sven Väth: Sound of the Third Season, 2002 (DJ mix album)Richie Hawtin and Ricardo Villalobos Live at the Robert Johnson, Offenbach, Germany, 2004 (11-hour DJ set)Richie Hawtin: DE9 | Transitions, 2005 (DJ mix album)Richie Hawtin: DE9 lite: Electronic Adventures, 2006 (DJ mix album, produced with MixMag)Richie Hawtin: Sounds from Can Elles, 2008 (unmixed various artist compilation, free with DJ Magazine issue 467)Richie Hawtin: Mixmag presents: Richie Hawtin - New Horizons, 2012 (DJ mix album)Richie Hawtin: CLOSE COMBINED (Live, GLASGOW, LONDON, TOKYO), 2019 (DJ mix album)


== Music awards ==


=== DJ Awards ===
DJ Awards organizes the annual electronic music DJ awards event. It is the only international ceremony for DJs and also the oldest, and is held once a year at Pacha club in Ibiza Spain. The award is one of the most important accolades an artist can win or be honoured by.Hawtin has won the Best Techno DJ Award three times and received 17 nominations overall.


=== AIM Awards ===
The Association of Independent Music (AIM) UK the AIM promotes independent artists producing their own music globally.


== DJ rankings (current) ==
The DJ List Ranking
The DJ List has approximately 1 million members who rate DJs in different EDM genres, these are the statistics for The DJ List as of 6 November 2015.
Top Deejays Ranking
Topdeejays is a global DJ database founded and operated by FM Agencija. It uses an algorithm that measures general social media influence of a DJ by combining their Facebook, Twitter, Google Plus, SoundCloud, MySpace, Last.fm and YouTube fans, subscribers and followers TDJ calculates and applies TDJ points to in order rank artists global, national and by genre influence. These are the statistics for topdeejays as of 6 November 2015.
DJ Rankings The Official Global DJ Rankings is calculated according to an advanced algorithm, compiled to give an accurate, independent and fair ranking of all DJs. It considers the following criteria
of DJ earnings, media presence, chart data from music releases and remixes, airplay data from radio stations, public data about royalties collected from copyright associations, followers on major social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter etc. and polling and rating data from various sites, such as dj-rating.com and djmag.com.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Plastikman". Future Music. No. 76. November 1998. ISSN 0967-0378. OCLC 1032779031.