Daniel Michael Andriano (born June 27, 1977) is an American singer and musician. He is best known as the co-lead vocalist and bassist of the punk rock band Alkaline Trio, with whom he has recorded nine studio albums to date.
Andriano also records solo material under the name Dan Andriano in the Emergency Room and has released two solo albums to date, Hurricane Season (2011) and Party Adjacent (2015). Since February 2019, he has played bass with the rock supergroup The Damned Things.


== Early bands ==
In 1993, he and several friends from the Elgin area formed the punk-ska band Slapstick, with Andriano playing bass and contributing backing vocals. He would remain a member through the release of two full-length albums (Lookit! and a self-titled compilation) until the group's breakup in 1996. After the breakup he and two other ex-members of Slapstick formed the band Tuesday, which released an EP, Early Summer, in 1997 and a full-length album, Freewheelin, later that year.


== Alkaline Trio ==

In late 1997, Andriano was asked by Matt Skiba to join the Alkaline Trio, replacing original bassist Rob Doran. His first release with the band was the 1998 EP For Your Lungs Only. The band has since released nine studio albums.


== Side and solo projects ==

Andriano played bass on The Falcon's 2004 EP, God Don't Make No Trash or Up Your Ass with Broken Glass, at the request of guitarist and lead vocalist Brendan Kelly, and would return in 2006 to play bass and provide vocals for Unicornography. He also played bass guitar on Ben Weasel's 2007 album These Ones Are Bitter.
Andriano also performs as a solo act under the name "Dan Andriano in the Emergency Room". His first solo album, Hurricane Season, was released on August 9, 2011, through Asian Man Records. Later that year, Andriano toured Europe with Chuck Ragan, Dave Hause of The Loved Ones, and Brian Fallon of The Gaslight Anthem as part of the 2011 Revival Tour. The following year, Andriano again performed on the North American leg of The Revival Tour alongside Ragan, Cory Branan, Laura Jane Grace of Against Me!, and Nathaniel Rateliff. Dan Andriano "in the Emergency Room" released his second album 'Party Adjacent' on July 17, 2015.
In 2019, Andriano joined the rock supergroup The Damned Things, replacing bassist Josh Newton. He has recorded one album with the band titled High Crimes.
Andriano announced a new side project in August 2021 called Dan Andriano & The Bygones composed of himself and Get Married members Dylan Moore and Randy Moore. Later that year, the group announced their debut album, Dear Darkness, which is set to be released on February 11, 2022.


== Equipment ==
Andriano has played Fender Jazz and Precision Basses for most of his career. He also had a limited run of 20 signature Jazz Basses made by GPC.For amplification, Andriano uses a 1971 Marshall Major in the studio and Orange AD-200B (and occasionally Ampeg SVT) amps in concert.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Alkaline Trio website
Interview 8/21/2008
Alkaline Trio Equipment List
Dan's Facebook page for "Dan Andriano In The Emergency Room"
Kerrang! Slamdunk Podcast: Alkaline Trio