Zhou Mi (Chinese name: 周覓, born (1986-04-19)April 19, 1986) is a Chinese singer, actor, songwriter, presenter, MC, and radio DJ based in South Korea and China. He is a member of the boy band Super Junior's sub-unit Super Junior-M and SM Entertainment's project group SM the Ballad. Aside from group activities, he also participates in various television variety shows, radio shows, and dramas. He made his solo debut in 2014 with the EP Rewind.


== Early life ==
Zhou Mi was born in Wuhan, Hubei province, China on 19 April 1986. As the only child of his family. He has been interested in music since childhood.


== Career ==


=== 2002–2007: Pre-debut ===
In 2002, he participated in the 2nd National MTV Newcomer Singing Contest and won the Beijing Division Championship and the National Championship.
He studied Broadcasting at Beijing Normal University Zhuhai Campus in Guangdong province.Zhou Mi made a name for himself in the Chinese entertainment scene by competing in competitions.  In 2006, he contention for the final round of CCTV's Challenging the Host, a televised national competition for aspiring MCs from all over China, he won the first place in the Guangzhou Division of the CCTV challenge host and was promoted to the top 16 in the country but in June of the same year, he choose to dropped out and went to South Korea to study music.In 2007 Zhou Mi won the grand prize at the SM UCC Star Audition, although he didn't audition live, The auditions were conducted online from March 27 to early July 2007. His Korean friend, Kim Ki Hoon, signed him up to audition through the "Recommend a Friend" category, where he uploaded a video of Zhou Mi singing. he performed a song from Toy (토이) with the titled 내가 너의 곁에 잠시 살았다는걸 (That I was once by your side), and then he signed a contract with SM Entertainment and began his trainee careerZhou Mi was appeared as MC the showcase of Zhang Liyin , and a few months later, he debuted in China as a member of Super Junior-M.


=== 2008–2013: Career beginnings ===

Zhou Mi debuted as the main vocalist of Super Junior-M in 2008.
They debuted in China at the 8th Annual Music Chart Awards, simultaneously with the release of their first music video, "U" on 8 April 2008. First studio album, Me was released on April 23, 2008.
Their album, debuted in Korea's MIAK Monthly Charts as #10  and reached #1 in China's Top in Music chart.
In this album he wrote three songs with titled "Love Song", "A Man in Love", and "Marry U".Super Junior-M's first mini-album, Super Girl, was released on September 23, 2009.
In this album he wrote two songs with titled "Confession" and "You and Me". The mini-album won many awards and even earned the group a nomination for "Best Vocal Group" at the 21st Golden Melody Awards, the Chinese equivalent of the Grammy Awards.In 2010 aside group activity Zhou Mi also hosting a Chinese show titled Korean Impression. This is a mainland travel-based show that focuses on Korea's latest news and cultural history. Each episode is aimed at having around 3 to 4 different themes which include things like the latest fashion products in Korea, Kpop idols, delicious Korean foods and dishes, and  Korea's unique culture and special attractions.Zhou Mi wrote three songs for Kangta Chinese EP Breaka Shaka in 2010, in this album he wrote the lead single "Breaka Shaka", "Remember", and "Many Times".In February 2011, Zhou Mi acted in a supporting role in the Chinese drama Melody of Youth, which become his debut in that industry.
He also participated in the OST's on the ending theme song "Youth Melody" and featured other cast sang "Dandelion".Super Junior-M Second EP Perfection was released on February 23, 2011. In this album he wrote song with the titled "True Love". 
The album was one of the best-selling albums of 2011 in Taiwan.He joined Super Junior-M with Henry Lau for the single "Santa U Are The One" taken from SMTown's eighth winter album, 2011 Winter SMTown – The Warmest Gift, it was released in December 2011.Zhou Mi participated in the OST for Siwon and Donghae's Taiwanese drama series Skip Beat! on the track "Goodbye (不留紀念)", this song was released on December 11, 2011.In 2012 Zhou Mi was cast as the main role in the idol drama When Love Walked In alongside label-mate Victoria Song, and Calvin Chen of the group Fahrenheit.
The drama premiered on August 27 on Anhui, Hubei, Shaanxi and Sichuan Satellite TV and reached the number one spot in viewership ratings.Super Junior-M's second studio album, Break Down, was released on January 7, 2013, along with a lead single of the same name. The album includes three songs were written by himself with titled "Go", "It's You" and "Tunnel". The music for songs were composed by fellow Super Junior-M member Henry Lau and his team Noize Bank. Their Korean version of "Break Down" was released on January 31. On the same day, they made their official debut in Korea on Mnet's M! Countdown.
Malaysian singer and composer Michael Wong contributed to this album by composing a song for Zhou Mi, called "Distant Embrace", while the lyrics are written by Hong Kong singer and actress Crystal Cheung. The lyrics of "Distant Embrace" are about the faint pain of a love.On April 7, 2013, Zhou Mi released a travel scrapbook titled Thai Perfect which included his travel experience in Thailand.
Two versions of the book were released, one comes with a traditional Chinese and the other is simplified Chinese which released on December 5, 2013.
On April, 2013, Zhou Mi was cast in the movie Rhythm of Rain (聽見下雨的聲音). He played as a big boy who has a bright personality and is very sincere. This movie directed by lyricist Vincent Fang. This movie was released on October 4, 2013.
In 2013, Zhou Mi was chosen to be a radio DJ on MBC's C-Radio Idol True Colour with Miss A's member Jia and Fei. The program on the new media platform showcases content produced by the network and targets the large number of hallyu or Korean wave fans in China.
The network produces one episode each week, and the show is released to Chinese viewers on a Chinese video site such as Youku and Tudou, without going through a Chinese broadcasting station.


=== 2014–present: SM the Ballad and solo debut ===

In February 2014, Zhou Mi became a new member of the ballad group SM The Ballad, initially formed in 2010. Zhou Mi participated in the group's 2nd album, Breath, performing the Chinese version of "Blind".
Zhou Mi performed his song at the S.M. The Ballad Joint Recital on February 12. He also performed this song on Arirang's music program Simply K-Pop, MBC M's music program Show Champion, and SBS MTV's music program The Show.
In March 2014, Super Junior-M's third mini album, Swing was released, The EP consists of six songs, which were released for digital download on March 21, 2014 in China and Taiwan by S.M. Entertainment.
In this album Zhou Mi also contributing lyrics to their lead single, "Swing" and "Fly High".
The group released the album in Korean music sites, such as MelOn, genie, Naver music and more, on March 31, 2014, and promoted on Korean music programs.In 2014, Zhou Mi was chosen to host the Korean-Chinese Variety Show titled Strongest Group with his labelmate Victoria Song. Zhou Mi then wrote the Chinese version of the track "Run" from Exo's second extended play Overdose.On October 22, 2014, Zhou Mi became an MC for season 4 of the SBS MTV's music program The Show with Park Ji-yeon (T-ara) and Hongbin (VIXX).His first solo EP Rewind was released on October 31, 2014.
The Chinese version of the Rewind featured Tao and The Korean version was featured Chanyeol.
All the tracklist in this album was written by himself.
Zhou Mi appeared as the Talk MC on the new season of fashion survival show
Fashion King - Secret Box, which premiered April 25, 2015, a survival show starring top Korean and Chinese celebrities.In 2015, Zhou Mi was cast in the drama Best Couple as the male lead character. This drama is set in the modern day Korean entertainment industry. It is the first TV production project from China's e-commerce company Alibaba. This drama aired in China in early 2016. and recorded more than 100 million views.In the same year, Zhou Mi participated in Super Junior special album, Devil was released to celebrate the group's 10th anniversary. He wrote lyric for "Forever with You" that was sung by Super Junior-M.In early 2016, it was confirmed that Zhou Mi will be continuing to host the 5th season of SBS MTV The Show with new co-MC, GFriend's Yerin. He stepped down from his MC position on August 2 of that year, having hosted The Show for almost two years.Zhou Mi's second EP What's Your Number? was released on July 19, 2016.
He wrote the Chinese lyrics for a lead single "What's Your Number" and "Empty Room".On April 19, 2018, Zhou Mi released a digital single titled "I Don't Care".
On the next day he hold a fan meeting  in Beijing, China to celebrated his birthday with his fans.On December 26, 2018, Zhou Mi released a single "The Lonely Flame" the track was written and composed by himself. The music video was directed by Shindong.In 2020 Zhou Mi collaborated with two member of WayV Kun and Xiaojun on the single "I'll be There", released on February 28, 2020. the track was written and composed by himself. "I'll be There" was a tribute song for the frontliners and those who are affected by COVID-19 especially to his hometown Wuhan, China.On June 22, 2020, Zhou Mi collaborated with fellow Super Junior-M member Ryeowook with new single "Starry Night". The Chinese version of the track was written and composed by himself.


== Discography ==


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


=== Compilation appearances ===


=== Songwriting and composing credits ===
Music credits adapted from the Korea Music Copyright Association.


== Filmography ==


== Bibliography ==


== Fan meeting ==


== Achievements ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Zhou Mi's Official Website (in Korean)