Stephen Deon Draie Goldsborough (born December 7, 1988), better known by his stage name Young Steff, is an American singer, rapper, and songwriter. Steff was born in Vineland, New Jersey. His father was a member of the gospel group Spirit, and his aunt, Gina Thompson has worked with producer Rodney Jerkins. By 8, Steff toured with and sang alongside his father's group, Spirit. Steff won talent shows, including the McDonald's Apollo kid's competition in Philadelphia, his path to success seemed relatively straightforward, especially at age 12 when his demo landed in the hands of then Roc-A-Fella Records executives Jay-Z and Damon Dash, and they signed him to their music label.  In 2002, while with the Roc, Steff had success and scored a hit with the song "Can I Holla" that featured Bow Wow. In 2005, Dash and Carter parted ways: Steff chose to become a free agent.
After the controversial Roc-A-Fella departure, Steff was led to music producer Rich Harrison (who produced hits such as Amerie "1 Thing ", Jennifer Lopez "Get Right", and Beyoncé "Crazy In Love") who offered to sign the young performer to his growing Richcraft label through Atlantic Records after an impromptu audition, with dancers in tow. Now since the controversial Roc-A-Fella Records departure in 2005, Young Steff is back on track with a solo-record debut rumored to be titled "Jump It Off", which was due out September 18, 2008. Steff has described this album to be a young man's journey to adulthood with the wide-eyed wonderment of a boy still in awe of his sudden rise to R&B-icon status. Steff collaborated with Trick Daddy on the song "Chevy".


== Forthcoming debut album ==
The album is called "Jump It Off".Tracks on the album include the Bryan Michael Cox produced, "If You Let Me," an up-tempo classic ballad, "Feeling Myself," a sexy tune with a heavy-hitting bass produced by Rich Harrison, "Take It or Leave It," sung in a confident falsetto, "Hallway," where Steff pours his heart out with colorful verse written by him, and "Dat Gurl Right Der," and "Put That on Everything".His first single was "Professional" which is produced by up and coming producer Chase N. Cashe of Zone 4 Inc.
His second single is "Slow Jukin" Produced by Chris 'TEK' O'Ryan and Durrell 'Bishop' Scott for NewFaze Entertainment.


== Albums ==
2005: Here and Now (shelved)


== Singles ==
2004: "R.O.C. Anthem"
2008: "Put That on Everything"
2008: "Professional" (#113 US R&B)
2009: "Slow Jukin'" (#85 US R&B)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Young Steff | Listen and Stream Free Music, Albums, New Releases, Photos, Videos Official Myspace