Daniel Alan Spitz (born January 28, 1963) is an American musician and watchmaker best known for his work as the lead guitarist of the American heavy metal band Anthrax from 1983 to 1995 and from 2005 to 2008. With Anthrax, Spitz was nominated for three Grammy awards and earned several platinum albums. Spitz also founded the Christian music group Red Lamb, which was known for lyrics on autism awareness. Spitz has earned Swiss and American degrees in luxury mechanical watchmaking and micro-mechanical engineering, certified as watchmaker instructor for the North American operations of Swiss watch company Chopard.


== Career ==
Spitz began playing guitar after being inspired by the music of Judas Priest and Iron Maiden and his older brother David, who was also a musician. He formed a close bond with another local guitarist named Anthony Ammendolo and the two agreed to pursue a musical career together. They formed a garage band but never gained much of a local following. In 1981, Spitz and Ammendolo joined New Jersey thrash band Overkill after their original guitarist quit over the band's heavy drinking and unprofessionalism. Overkill, at that time, were a very theatrical band incorporating heavy use of stage makeup. Spitz and Ammendolo initially had no issues with the band's theatrical image but soon grew tired with it and left.Spitz soon became enthralled with the playing of Eddie Van Halen and began moving in a more melodic direction, and he and Ammendolo grew apart musically. In 1983, Spitz was a founding member of New York City's Anthrax, replacing lead guitarist Bob Berry. Spitz would remain Anthrax' lead guitarist and backing vocalist during their most successful period between 1983 and 1995, appearing on the albums Fistful of Metal, Armed and Dangerous, Spreading the Disease, Among the Living, State of Euphoria, Persistence of Time and Sound of White Noise, earning him multiple RIAA-certified gold and platinum records. Anthrax sold more than 30 million albums worldwide during this period.In 1995, Spitz left Anthrax to pursue a career in luxury Swiss watchmaking, attending the Swiss watchmaking school WOSTEP on a full scholarship. He was certified a Mechanical Complications Specialist, earning Swiss degrees in micro-mechanical engineering, and opened his own luxury watch service. In 2012 Spitz was voted the number 1 interview of the year for the watchmaking magazine Hodinkee. In 2016, the production company Great Big Story produced a documentary on Spitz's work as a watchmaker.Spitz reunited with Anthrax for a classic lineup reunion tour in 2005, appearing on the tour DVD Alive 2. He left the band again in 2008 to return to his watchmaking career. In 2010 Spitz formed a new Christian rock/metal band Red Lamb, which also included singer Don Chaffin from Voices of Extreme and keyboardist Chris Vrenna. Dave Mustaine was an early member but ultimately stepped back into a songwriting role with Spitz. Mustaine and Spitz wrote the song "Puzzle Box" which was claimed to be the first heavy metal song to deal with autism; the song's video featured Bob and Suzanne Wright, co-founders of Autism Speaks. In 2017, Spitz formed another Christian metal band with former Journey drummer Deen Castronovo.


== Personal life ==
Spitz was born in a small town in Rockland County, New York as the second son of a lawyer and a high school substitute teacher. Spitz comes from an orthodox Levite tribe Jewish family and converted to Christianity / Messianic Judaism in 1993. His older brother, Dave Spitz is also an accomplished heavy metal musician who has been a member of Black Sabbath and Great White.
Spitz has two daughters from his first marriage. Spitz also has identical twin sons who were born in 2007; they were diagnosed with autism at 16 months of age. The Spitz twins were in numerous films and television commercials before their autism diagnosis, including the film Away We Go.In June 2009, Spitz had a massive heart attack, causing him to undergo an emergency triple bypass. He fully recovered but required stents in many arteries.Spitz divorced his second wife in 2014.


== Equipment ==
Spitz was originally known for his use of Jackson Guitars (he was famous for his Jackson Randy Rhoads model with the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles painted on them), and he collaborated on guitar designs with Grover Jackson. During the Anthrax Reunion tour, Spitz endorsed Paul Reed Smith Guitars, using a custom model with a "Spitz" head stock. This guitar was also painted with Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles by tattoo artist and painter JR Linton. Spitz terminated his endorsement with PRS after leaving Anthrax in 2007.
In the early days of Anthrax, Spitz used Marshall amplifiers, using one of the first incarnations of a pre JCM800 derived from a collaboration with Jim Marshall. Around the time of "Among the Living," Spitz switched to Mesa/Boogie, using many Mark IIC heads modified by Spitz. During the Anthrax Reunion in 2005–2007, Spitz used Matchless heads and Marshall point-to-point wired 2203 modded heads he hand-built himself that were pushed by a Keeley-modded Boss DS-1.


== Discography ==


=== Anthrax ===

Fistful of Metal (1984)
Armed and Dangerous (1985)
Spreading the Disease (1985)
Among the Living (1987)
State of Euphoria  (1988)
Persistence of Time (1990)
Sound of White Noise (1993)
Alive 2 (2005)


=== Red Lamb ===
Red Lamb (2012)


== References ==