Gregory Dean Camp (born April 2, 1967) is an American Grammy Award-nominated songwriter, guitarist, and vocalist. He is best known as the founding guitarist and songwriter for the rock band Smash Mouth (1994–2008, 2009–2011, 2014, 2018–2019). Camp is credited as the primary songwriter, whose songs catapulted the band to acclaim with hits, awards, and multi-platinum albums. Camp left Smash Mouth after 16 years and has remained an active songwriter and music producer.


== Biography ==
Camp was born in West Covina, California, but attended Lynbrook High School in San Jose, California.  Before Smash Mouth, he had been a musician in the California rock scene since the 1980s. He was part of several bands including the Gents, when Steve Harwell and Kevin Coleman approached him to form a new band. Camp declined, but Harwell and Coleman persisted, including harassing Camp with a morning pounding on his apartment window, until Camp agreed to look at the songs they had written. They formed Smash Mouth soon after.Camp has written Smash Mouth's most memorable songs of the later 1990s and early 2000s, including "Walkin' on the Sun," "All Star," and "Then the Morning Comes". Camp's song Heave-Ho was about his experience living in San Jose's St Leo neighborhood. He was the guitarist and backing vocalist from when he co-founded the band in 1994 until he left in summer of 2008.After leaving Smash Mouth, Camp released a solo album, Defektor, on Bar/None Records. Guitar Player wrote that the album "weaves together everything you love about vintage guitar tones, tortured Farfisa, '60s frat-rock vocal hooks, and epic Morricone-esque soundscapes."In June 2009 Camp played a couple of concerts with Smash Mouth, but never rejoined the band. He also plays guitar and sings with Santa Cruz rock band The Maids of Honor and Los Angeles The Selectrics. Camp currently works as a songwriter and producer in Los Angeles.


== References ==


== External links ==
Greg Camp at IMDb
Greg Camp at AllMusic