Christopher Taylor (born August 29, 1981) is an American multi-instrumentalist and record producer. He is best known as the bass guitarist, backing vocalist and producer of the Brooklyn-based indie rock band Grizzly Bear, with whom he has recorded four studio albums. Taylor also records solo material under the moniker CANT, releasing his debut album, Dreams Come True, in 2011.
Acting as Grizzly Bear's regular producer, Taylor has also produced albums for Dirty Projectors, Department of Eagles, Miles Benjamin Anthony Robinson, Twin Shadow, Kishi Bashi and The Morning Benders.


== Biography ==
Born in Seattle, Washington, United States, Taylor is a 2004 graduate of New York University, and once worked in a coffee shop with TV on the Radio members Kyp Malone and David Sitek.He joined Grizzly Bear following their first release, Horn of Plenty (2004). His contributions to the band's sound since then have varied, and he has become the band's producer since their second album, Yellow House (2006). In live performances, Taylor frequently switches between playing the bass, clarinet, flute, saxophone and sometimes the accordion. He also contributes vocals on most songs.


== CANT and Terrible Records ==
In mid-2009 Taylor founded Terrible Records with label partner Ethan Silverman. He has also released his own solo material which (under the moniker CANT) on the label. His debut solo album, Dreams Come True, was released September 13, 2011.


== Discography ==
Arthur Russell - Love is Overtaking Me - mixing, editing and restoration
Canon Blue - Colonies - mastering
Department of Eagles - In Ear Park - co-producer, electric bass, flute, woodwinds, effects
Dirty Projectors - Rise Above - co-producer
Grizzly Bear - Yellow House - producer, bass guitar, vocals, clarinet, flute, saxophone, electronics and treatments
Grizzly Bear - Friend EP - producer, vocals
Grizzly Bear - Veckatimest - producer, bass guitar, vocals
Grizzly Bear - Shields - producer, vocals, bass, synths, saxophones, clarinet, bass clarinet, flutes, drum machine, the wheel
Grizzly Bear - Painted Ruins
Miles Benjamin Anthony Robinson - Self-titled - producer
CANT - Dreams Come True - vocals, instrumentation, producer
CANT/Arthur Russell - Split 7" - producer
Acrylics - All of the Fire EP - producer
Liima - 1982 - producer
The Morning Benders - Big Echo - producer
Nat Baldwin - Most Valuable Player - producer
TV on the Radio - Return to Cookie Mountain - horns, clarinet
Twin Shadow - Forget - producer
Kishi Bashi - Sonderlust - producer


== References ==