Andrieu Contredit d'Arras (c. 1200 – 1248) was a trouvère from Arras and active in the Puy d'Arras. "Contredit" is probably a nickname. He wrote mostly grand chants, but also a pastourelle, a lai, and a jeu-parti with Guillaume li Vinier.
Andrieu is probably the Andreas Contredit, miles ministerellus, crucesignatus who in 1239, according to French royal documents, joined the Crusade of Theobald I of Navarre as a knight and minstrel. His appearance in royal documents may indicate his service (probably as a minstrel) to Louis IX, and he addressed his song Au mois d'avril to Louis.
His song Ja pour nul mal was addressed to the Puy. One of the most important sources on his life is the register of the Puy. It records his death at Arras in 1248 and the death of his wife in 1225. Besides the register of the Puy are Andrieu's poems themselves, since he wrote twenty and named himself as author in fourteen. He addressed Bone, bele et avenans to a "Marote", probably fellow trouvère Maroie de Diergnau de Lille. He praised the city of Arras in L'autrier quant je chevauchoie. Andrieu twice refers to himself as messire (mister), a title reserved for nobility. His blason had once decorated chansonnier known as MS 844 in the Bibliothèque nationale de France, but it has now been lost.
Andrieu's verses show little variation of form. They all begin with the same rhyme scheme (ABAB), all are in regular metre, and all use the same few lengths of line. Andrieu's music is more varied, though it is all in bar form. The melodies are frequently non-repetitive and sometimes motivic.


== List of works ==
Amours m'a si del tout a son voloir
Au mois d'avril que l'on dit en Pascour
Au tens que je voi averdir
Bone, bele et avenans
Dame, pour vous m'esjoïs benement
De bele Yzabel ferai, survives without music
[De] bone amour ki le set maintenir, survives without music and incipit
Del guerredon ke j'atenc a avoir, survives without music and incipit
Guillaume le Viniers, amis, his part of a jeu-parti, survives without music
Iriez, pensis chanterai
Ja pour nul mal ne peur nesun tourment
Ja pour nul mal ne peur nule pensee
Je ne me doi d'Amours de riens loer
L'autrier quant je chevauchoie
Mout m'est bel quant voi repairier
Pré ne vert bois, rose ne flour de lis
Quant voi partir foille et flour et rosee
Tout tens est mes cuers en joie
Tres haute Amours me semont que je chant
Vivre m'estuet en tristror, en pesance


== References ==
Karp, Theodore. "Andrieu Contredit d'Arras." Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online. Accessed 20 September 2008.


== Notes ==