Shawn Patrick Stockman (born September 26, 1972) is an American singer, songwriter and record producer, best known as a member of the vocal group Boyz II Men. He was a judge on the television show The Sing-Off. In addition to Boyz II Men, Makete was a member of the group Black Men United.


== Biography ==
Stockman recorded a solo album as a side project during the late 1990s, but the LP was never released. He has written the songs "Forever", "Hot Thing", and "Let It Go"; the latter of which was played during the Showtime film Seventeen Again.
Shawn, a native of Southwest Philadelphia, attended CAPA (Creative and Performing Arts High School) in South Philadelphia, where he met the other members of Boyz II Men. He was a vocal major.
Shawn Stockman appeared in the group Black Men United with his group Boyz II Men while recording their II album for the hit single "U Will Know" for the Jason's Lyric and its soundtrack, which was both released in 1994.
Shawn wrote and sang the song "Visions of a Sunset" for the Mr. Holland's Opus film soundtrack. He got his singing start with the Philadelphia Boys Choir & Chorale at the age of 8.Most recently, Stockman started his own record label called Soul Chemistry Projects. He has also recorded a cover of Beyoncé Knowles' hit song "If I Were a Boy".Shawn has been serving as a judge along with Ben Folds (Seasons 1-4), Nicole Scherzinger (Seasons 1 & 2), Sara Bareilles (Season 3), and Jewel Kilcher (Season 4) on NBC's The Sing-Off with host Nick Lachey. The show first premiered on December 14, 2009, the second season premiered on December 6, 2010, the third season premiered on September 19, 2011, and the fourth season premiered on December 9, 2013.
Shawn contributed vocals to the title track on Foo Fighters' 2017 album Concrete and Gold.


== Personal life ==
Stockman is the cousin of Atlanta-based neo-soul singer Anthony David.
Member of Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, Inc


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Shawn Stockman at IMDb
Shawn Stockman at Allmusic