David P. Szatmary (born May 27, 1951) is an educator, author on various subjects, and an educational entrepreneur.


== Educator and author ==
Based upon his academic work, he published Shays' Rebellion: The Making of an Agrarian Insurrection (University of Massachusetts, 1980). He consulted on the Calliope production of the movie Shays' Rebellion, and more recently was featured in a History Channel program about the rebellion and its importance to the formation of the U.S. Constitution.Combining his history expertise with his experience in the music business, he wrote Rockin’ In Time: A Social History of Rock and Roll, published by Prentice-Hall, now in its eighth edition.  He also wrote A Time to Rock (Schirmer, 1985). He published a book on the social history of jazz in May 2020 for Oxford University Press, titled Jazz: Race and Social Change (1870–2019).  In addition, he has contributed to the All-Music Guide.In 1984, Szatmary joined the University of Washington (UW), a public research institution based in Seattle, Washington, in the university's continuing and professional education unit, University of Washington Educational Outreach.


== Educational entrepreneur ==
Szatmary has been an innovative educational entrepreneur by creating partnerships with other educational institutions, corporations and international organizations.  In 2003, he started R1edu.org, a consortium of 34 Research I universities and AAU institutions that provide online learning opportunities. and He also initiated OpenUW, a series of 12 free, open-source online programs available to the public in partnership with the Learning Network, a Pearson-owned company.
In 2005, Szatmary helped organize Actions, Solutions, Growth: University Partners (ASG). ASG is a partnership of a dozen continuing education leaders at large nonprofit and for-profit universities in North America. The group collaborates on a variety of initiatives, including the development of joint educational programs. Current ASG programs include a certificate program in Biotechnology Project Management with the University of Washington and University of California, San Diego and a certificate program in Decision Making for Climate Change jointly created by the University of Washington, University of California, Irvine, the University of British Columbia Continuing Studies Centre for Sustainability and Northwestern University.
Szatmary has forged partnerships between University of Washington Educational Outreach and organizations including the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), and Pearson/Prentice-Hall Publishing. Notable corporate partnerships include the UW-Boeing relationship.
Szatmary has been instrumental in building a partnership with the United Arab Emirates Academy in Abu Dhabi. Since February 2007, University of Washington Educational Outreach has provided professional certificate programs in the IBDAA program for young job seekers. This partnership marks the first time the University of Washington has established a base abroad to teach foreign nationals in their home country.Szatmary has served as the principal investigator for more than $6 million in grants, allowing UW Educational Outreach to provide online programs in technology and other subject areas.  From 2012 to 2014, he worked on	a nearly $1 million grant from Educause and the Gates Foundation to develop a low-cost online undergraduate program in the social sciences.Based upon his experience and accomplishments during the last 25 years, Szatmary has written articles and been asked to comment about different aspects of online learning and types of partnership and collaboration models.Szatmary became a leader in the development and dissemination of MOOCs, massive open online courses, leading the University of Washington as one of the first institutions to contribute to Coursera and EdX.  He has been quoted about the topic in such publications as the New York Times, The Chronicle of Education and Inside Higher Education as well as other publications.In addition to his work on MOOCs, Szatmary has become well known for his development of effective and efficient budget models in higher education.  He developed a blueprint for successful continuing education budgeting and financial management in his article, "Activity-Based Budgeting in Higher Education."


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Jackson, Kristin. "The Leading man of London arts tours". The Seattle Times. February 10, 2008.
King, Marsha. "School's never out for lifelong learners". The Seattle Times. May 15, 2008.
Muhlstein, Julie. "UW opens city branch, but only if you're over 50". Herald. May 31, 2009.
Perry, Nick. "Mideast is first stop on UW's overseas teaching program" The Seattle Times. July 21, 2006.
Pohlig, Colleen. "High-school kids jump-start college". The Seattle Times. July 29, 2002.
Rivera, Ray."UW to offer free online courses". The Seattle Times. May 28, 2001.
Sanchez, Roberto. "Boomers Look For Stability At School -- Record Numbers Return To Higher Education". The Seattle Times. July 21, 1997.
Shubert, Ruth. "Higher education is just a log-on away: UW programs follow national online trend". The Seattle Post-Intelligencer. September 27, 1999.
UW Extension,"Professional & Continuing Education: Summer 2009 Catalogue".
University of Washington,"UW Educational Outreach: Year in Review 2007-08".


== External links ==
University of Washington Educational Outreach homepage, outreach.washington.edu
University of Washington homepage, washington.edu
Members List, asguniversitypartners.org
Profile, R1edu.org