Tripp Eisen (born Tod Rex Salvador; June 29, 1965), is an American musician best known as the former guitarist of industrial metal band Static-X. He is the guitarist for Face Without Fear and a former member of Dope, Murderdolls, Fractured Mirror (Ace Frehley tribute band), and Roughhouse  (formerly Teeze).


== Music career ==


=== Dope (1997–2000) ===
Dope was formed in 1997, when Eisen met with brothers Edsel and Simon Dope. Eisen brought in friend Preston Nash to play drums, and the band worked the New York City club circuit. In 1998, Dope was signed to Flip/Sony records, and Eisen moved from bass guitar to lead guitar, bringing in Acey Slade—who had first referred Eisen to Dope a few years earlier—to play bass.After the release of the album "Felons and Revolutionaries" (1999) the band toured extensively throughout the U.S. and Canada with acts such as: Sevendust, Kid Rock, Static-X, Slipknot, Disturbed, Chevelle, Fear Factory, Staind, and Alice Cooper. During this time, Eisen met Wayne Static and Joey Jordison, with whom he would later work. Eisen appeared in the Dope videos for "Sick" and "Everything Sucks", and gained much notoriety from his wild antics and stage persona. He split with the band in late 2000 due to personal and creative differences, but not before co-writing two of Dope's most long-lived fan favorites: "Die MF Die" and "Stop", both from the Life album.The debut album sold in excess of 250,000 copies.


=== Murderdolls (1999–2002) ===
A side project formed c. 1999–2002 by Eisen and Joey Jordison of Slipknot. The seeds of this project were sown years beforehand, in the mind and garage of Joey Jordison, under the name The Rejects. This was long before Slipknot, and the nu-metal genre they identified with, rose to popularity. The Rejects would eventually morph into Murderdolls, and to Joey, this is no mere side-project.Murderdolls began to become more than just a figment of Joey's imagination (in 1999) when Slipknot toured with New Yorker's Dope, who had Eisen in their line-up at the time. The two bonded over a mutual love of such bands as Manowar, The Ramones and The Plasmatics.Tripp Eisen said of musician Joey Jordison, "I had spent my whole life being kind of a glam guy, but also digging the heavy, heavy music...It's rare to find someone who can relate to both, and that's what drew me to Joey. He's into Slayer and Twisted Sister with equal intensity, and there's not many people like that." To Tripp, there's not all that much difference between the two. Both metal and glam are escapist and theatrical in nature, and he points out Mötley Crüe and Slayer both used pentagrams on their albums. Together, during the off time from their respective bands, Joey and Tripp dug up some of Joey's old Rejects songs and dusted them off.In 2000, they played several shows in Iowa, with original vocalist Dizzy, and also featuring a friend of Tripp's, drummer Racci Shay (who went on to play in the band Dope, and was part of the 2010 lineup of Murderdolls). In 2001 the band continued to evolve, and added another acquaintance of Tripp's, Wednesday 13 on bass guitar (whom Tripp befriended while on tour with Dope). A few more live shows followed, and the name was changed to Murderdolls. Soon after, the decision was made to move Wednesday into the frontman position. The recording of the album was moved into high gear. Wednesday brought several of his own songs with him. Then, after the album was finished, the line-up was completed by Griffin and Graves.Eisen was still very much a part of Static-X, who were wrapping up their touring scenario for 2002 and imminently began writing their third album. Singer Wednesday 13, recruited to replace original Rejects singer Dizzy. The two newest members are Ben and Eric, friends of Tripp from L.A. They do not play on the record, and both were struggling musicians who felt left out by the prevalence of post-grunge and down-tuned rap-rock. They were working in shops on trendy Melrose Avenue when Tripp gave them a call. Murderdolls released their debut album Beyond the Valley of the Murderdolls, on August 19, 2002, via Roadrunner. The album featured Tripp's lead guitar work, and he appeared in the band's debut video, "Dead in Hollywood". Eisen ultimately parted ways with the band due to Static-X's recording schedule so he could fully contribute to the band's third album, Shadow Zone.


=== Static-X (2000-2005) ===
Eisen replaced original Static-X guitarist Koichi Fukuda. Fukuda had left the band due to creative differences with lead singer Wayne Static. Eisen joined the band in late 2000 upon Fukuda's departure and can be seen on the band's follow-up album Machine. Eisen contributed to Static-X's third album Shadow Zone and their fourth album Start a War, and also to the Static-X Rarities and B-sides compilation album Beneath... Between... Beyond....
Eisen stated that a number of the tracks on the 2020 Static-X album Project Regeneration Vol. 1 (which features unused vocal tracks from Eisen's time in the band) were co-written and demoed by him and Wayne and accused the band of attempting to alter the compositions to try and stinge him out of songwriting credits, he also stated a legal claim by him was the reason for the album's delay. The band has since confirmed they are using some of Eisen's contributions when responding to a fan query on Instagram but stated Eisen had no involvement in the studio whatsoever and that his contributions to the album are composition credits only.


=== Face Without Fear (2019) ===
In April 2019, Eisen announced a new project named Face Without Fear was announced through a short promo video. The group features Ken "Mantis" Hoyt (Crushpile) on vocals, TJ Cooke (Methodical) on drums, Dante on rhythm guitar, and Nick Sledge on bass. The band released Deliverance, their first single, on 2 June 2019. FWF played their live debut in August at Newark's QXT, New Jersey, on 25/08/2019. The band released their second single "My Parasite" in March 2020 and performed their first livestream event in June 2020.


== Legal issues ==
While a member of Static-X, Eisen was arrested on February 10, 2005, on a felony charge of statutory sexual contact with a minor in Orange County, California. He was released on bail after only a few hours in custody. Just two weeks later, on February 24, 2005, Eisen was arrested on a previous charge in California by New Jersey detectives and ultimately convicted of the charge "luring with a motor vehicle".Upon hearing of the arrests, Static-X replaced Eisen with the original guitarist Koichi Fukuda (whom Eisen had replaced after Fukuda left the band in 2001). On June 24, 2005, Eisen pleaded guilty to the charges in California and was sentenced to a year in state prison. He was released later that year and due for an October 7, 2005 arraignment in New Jersey on the February 24 charges.Eisen was back in jail on December 10, 2008, following a parole violation. He was released on October 19, 2009.On February 23, 2017, Eisen gave his first interview in more than a decade. In an interview with Totally Driven Radio, he spoke about his arrest and subsequent release from prison:

There were two cases [involving two separate girls]. I had to deal with both things. And I got through it. Yeah, there was two cases. People can... It's been out there. It's been so long ago. That's why it's kind of hard to talk about it. But I'm here, I'm alive, I'm well, I survived it, and the fact that... It was difficult.[...] Horrible judgment. What happened to me was really bad judgment, terrible mistakes that I made, and I paid a price for 'em.


== Equipment ==
In 2004 to 2005 BC Rich guitars produced a Tripp Eisen signature model of their Wave guitar. It featured in Gun metal gray, with two BDSM closed humbuckers, his signature on the back of the headstock and the Static-X symbol inlaid 12th fret. In 2005 Epiphone produced a prototype ES-335 signature model, with EMG Pickups, locking nut, and no f-holes. The ES-335 was, however, never commercially manufactured. After Eisen's return to performing from 2017 he has continued using his B.C. Rich Wave guitar.


== Discography ==
RoughhouseRoughhouse (1988) - (guitar, backing vocals)DopeFelons and Revolutionaries (1999) - (guitar, backing vocals)
American Psycho Soundtrack (2000) - (guitar, backing vocals)
Scream 3 Soundtrack (2000) - (guitar, backing vocals)
Life (2001) - (songwriting credits on 2 tracks)
The Fast and the Furious (2002) - (guitar, backing vocals)
Felons For Life (2002) - (guitar, backing vocals, songwriting)
Dope- The Early years- 1997/1998 (2017) - (guitar, backing vocals)MurderdollsBeyond The Valley of the Murderdolls (2002) - (guitar, backing vocals)
Beyond The Valley of the Murderdolls (Special Edition) (2003) - (guitar, backing vocals)Static-XMachine (2001) - (guitar)
The Family Values Tour 2001 (2001) - (guitar, back-up vocals)
Static-X: Chaos! Comics (2002) - (bonus DVD)
Queen of the Damned Soundtrack (2002) - (guitar, songwriting)
Shadow Zone (2003) - (guitar, songwriting)
Static-X: X-Posed (2003) - (DVD)
Texas Chainsaw Massacre Soundtrack (2003) - (guitar, backing vocals)
Beneath... Between... Beyond... (2004) - (guitar, songwriting)
Static-X: X-Rated (2005) - (DVD)
Start a War (2005) - (guitar, songwriting)
Cannibal Killers Live (2008) - (guitar, songwriting) (DVD videos)
Static-X: Original Album Series (box set) (2008) - (guitar, songwriting)
Project Regeneration Vol. 1 (2020) - (songwriting)


== References ==