Taylor Benjamin York (born December 17, 1989) is an American musician, songwriter, and record producer. He is the rhythm and lead guitarist of American rock band Paramore. His brother, Justin York, was a touring member of Relient K and is currently a touring guitarist for Paramore.


== Biography ==
York was born the youngest of three boys on December 17, 1989, and raised in Nashville, Tennessee. His father is Peter York, Chairman and CEO of Capitol Christian Music Group. Peter is also a guitarist and taught the instrument to both Taylor and his brother Justin. Taylor is the youngest of three brothers, and his eldest brother, Chris York, is the Senior Director of A&R at Capitol Records.York had been in a band with the Farro brothers (Josh and Zac) months before the two met Hayley Williams. Zac Farro introduced York to Williams at a high school football game, and they hit it off right away. York has taken part in writing songs such as "Conspiracy" from their debut album, All We Know Is Falling, and bonus track "O Star", which was the first song York wrote with Williams alone just after they met, when they were 12 and 13 years old. York has "officially" played with Paramore since 2007.


== Influences ==
York has stated that his favorite artists include mewithoutYou, Radiohead, Kent, Yann Tiersen, At the Drive-In, Failure, Björk, Kadawatha, and Paper Route. More recently in interviews, he has cited Afrobeat music as a big influence in his writing for After Laughter. Talking Heads, Fleetwood Mac, Blondie, Paul Simon, The Strokes, Thomas Mapfumo, Tame Impala, and The Cure were also named influences and favorite artists of his.


== Paramore ==

York had done backup vocals when he was younger for the band, before All We Know Is Falling. He joined Paramore after the departure of Hunter Lamb in 2007 as their rhythm guitarist. In the liner notes for the group's second album, Riot!, Hayley Williams, Josh Farro, and Zac Farro included him on their list of "thank yous". He also helped write "That's What You Get" and bonus track "Stop This Song", which his brother Justin York helped write.After the release of Riot!, Paramore released a live album, The Final Riot!. York was credited as a member of the band in the liner notes of the latter and was later officially acknowledged by Paramore as an official member on June 15, 2009. After Josh and Zac Farro left the band, Williams said that she was sure York would leave the band as well. York said in interview: “When it went down, it was hard for me to make a decision. I just wasn't ready. I broke down, and started crying at one point, and I just knew that I wasn't done and that I loved being in a band with Jeremy and Hayley so much. I still had a lot more to do with the band, so I just looked forward and did it.” Williams also stated that she was not that close to Taylor at the time. They finally met up for coffee after attending a show together, and Williams recalls crying in her car afterward and knew the band was going to be okay with York staying. Since then, they became close again and have since grown closer. York has taken part in the writing and recording of their albums since.In 2015, lead vocalist Hayley Williams quietly left Paramore for a brief period due to depression. York then remained the only member of Paramore, as bassist Jeremy Davis later left the band and embroiled York and Williams in a lawsuit over ownership and authorship of songs on Paramore's self-titled fourth record. Williams has praised York as someone who helped keep her alive during her depression. She also cites him as the reason Paramore is still a band and did not break up.


== References ==