Ron Stone is an American personal manager, and musician's advocate.  Stone is outspoken on Internet piracy and has worked to influence legislation on the issues of digital music, file sharing, and musician's intellectual property distribution rights.


== Biography ==


=== Early years ===
After moving from The Bronx to Los Angeles, Stone opened the hippie clothing store "The Great Linoleum Clothing Experiment" in 1967, doors down from The Troubadour. Stone began his career during music’s ‘golden age’ in 1968 at Geffen and Roberts Management alongside industry names such as David Geffen, Stone's childhood friend Elliot Roberts, and Irving Azoff where Stone helped to manage the careers of Neil Young, Joni Mitchell, The Eagles, Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, Bob Dylan, The Band, Devo and America and Tom Cochrane.


=== Recent career ===
Stone went on to form Gold Mountain Entertainment with Danny Goldberg and Burt Stein. They signed Bonnie Raitt and Belinda Carlisle, managing the careers of these artists who were experiencing multi-platinum career resurgence.
Later, with John Silva as a partner, Gold Mountain guided the careers of Nirvana, Beastie Boys, Beck, Rickie Lee Jones, Foo Fighters, Sonic Youth, Tracy Chapman, Ziggy Marley, The Baha Men, and Joss Stone.
Currently Gold Mountain LA represents: Ray Davies, Joan Osborne, Lynn Goldsmith and Rozy.
Gold Mountain’s Nashville office represents: Ronnie Milsap, Todd Snider, Hard Working Americans, and Nanci Griffith.
Gold Mountain’s Montreal, Canada office represents: Fastball.
In addition:
Stone, founded and was president of Something Music record company in partnership with Tony Valenziano and Kevin Day from Rocket Science.
Ron Stone Productions in partnership with Curb Musifilms, produced the feature film "The Harvest".Stone founded and ran World Domination Records for 10 years in partnership with Dave Allen (Gang of Four and Apple/Beats).
He also founded and ran Rock-it-comics for 5 years.
Stone’s knowledge of the Internet and new technology led him to consult on digital and copyright issues to the RIAA.
Stone leveraged his stature in the entertainment industry during the Internet boom to be a spokesman for the rights of artists whose intellectual property and content were being distributed freely via peer to peer applications like Napster.
When commenting on how file sharing has devalued music, Stone commented: “Music for a generation has become disposable and it used to be a collectible.”  Not to mince words, Stone targeted Napster when he said “It is the single most insidious website I’ve ever seen…it’s like a burglar’s tool”In a Los Angeles Times article on Net Music, Stone was asked to comment on what price consumers would be willing to pay for downloaded music:  "Forty-nine cents seems like the appropriate amount," said Ron Stone, president of Gold Mountain Entertainment, an artist management firm.  "if you can get kids to spend 49 cents, consider it a gift.  Make it 99 cents, you won't sell any, particularly if the singles market is a kids market." Stone continued to criticize his own industry as well as the Internet when he said “Were kind of stuck in this plantation system with the record companies.  And they’re the only games in town.  And we looked at the Internet as an opportunity to extricate ourselves from this situation and deal directly with our audience.  And now it’s not an option because the option now is we can have the relatively bad contractual arrangement with one of the majors, or we could have our property taken for free.  These are very bad choices.”
With Stone's counsel, Napster was sued by the Recording Industry Association of America on behalf of record labels for enabling piracy on an 'unprecedented scale'. In an article in Forbes:  The murky legal issue is whether Napster is materially contributing to infringing the copyrights, even if the company doesn't actually store the offending files. "Napster is driving the getaway car," said Ronald Stone, a manager with Gold Mountain Entertainment in Los Angeles.  Stone says he has found unauthorized copies of every single one of his artist's songs through Napster. With a group of other artists management and the RIAA, ran a series of television, radio and Web commercials urging the public to stop using the trendy program. 
Stone currently resides in Vail, Colorado with his wife of 55 years.


== References ==


== External links ==
Ron Stone interview on Artist Managers as entrepreneurs - Midem, June 2015
Story about the Summer of Love - Variety, 2017
Personal Managers Hall Of Fame, 2018
The Bob Lefsetz Podcast: Ron Stone. Oct, 2019