Maya Simantov is an Israeli singer and songwriter who has worked in the house music scene for over a decade. She is mostly known for her collaborations with DJ and producer Offer Nissim, such as "Everybody Needs a Man", "Let Me Live", "Alone", "Be My Boyfriend", "First Time" and more, and has written songs for recording artists such as Dana International, Rita and Sarit Hadad.


== Biography ==
Simantov rose to fame mostly for her collaborations with nightlife DJ Offer Nissim, who has worked with Madonna, Pet Shop Boys, Christina Aguilera, and Aretha Franklin. Releasing huge club anthems that have conquered charts and dancefloors all over the world. Her songs "That's the Way I Like it" and "Searching" have reached Top 10 in Billboard charts, which led to her signing with Peter Rauhofer's record label Star69.
Her debut album, First Time, was released in 2005 and produced by Offer Nissim has reached major success, received raving reviews, and sold millions of copies around the world. In Israel, First Time is the highest selling dance album in history. In 2010 Maya released her second album Over You, introducing the singles "I’m That Chick" and "Cuando" influenced by Spanish and R&B music.
Simantov has appeared in different countries, performing live in Tel Aviv, Mexico, Sydney and New York in front of tens of thousands of fans. The worldwide LGBT community has embraced Maya as their all-star diva, thanks to the hits "Everybody Needs a Man" and "Alone". Since then, Simantov is a requested artist as the main act major in Gay Pride Parades. Moreover, she performed in front of ten thousand people in Bloomfield Stadium, for two years in a row.
In addition, she collaborated with Mega-DJ's and producers including Peter Rauhofer, Tracy Young, DJ Skazi, Itay Kalderon (part of the duo "JetFire"), and Henree. Her most popular hit is "Take the World" produced by Yinon Yahel.Simantov is characterized by her wide ranged vocal abilities, soft, emotional and touching lyrics and compositions. She succeeded in combining dance music and ballads to a powerful and unique creations.
In 2021, Simantov participated in the fourth season of The X Factor Israel, in the goal of representing Israel in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022. She was eliminated in the chairs round.


== Discography ==
First Time (2005)
Second Time (2006)
Over You (2010)


== References ==


== External links ==
About.com Review of Debut Album "First Time
Article
"Maya Simantov". Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved February 5, 2016.
https://soundcloud.com/maya-simantov-official[1]