Daniel Jay Gokey (born April 24, 1980) is an American singer and former church music director from Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He was the third-place finalist on the eighth season of American Idol. After his placing on the show, Gokey signed to 19 Recordings and RCA Nashville at the beginning of a career in country music, releasing the single "My Best Days Are Ahead of Me.” His debut album, My Best Days, was released in March 2010.
After leaving RCA Nashville in November 2011, he gravitated his music towards an adult pop/contemporary Christian sound and subsequently made a record/publishing deal with BMG in May 2013. His second full-length album, Hope in Front of Me, was released in June 2014.


== Early life ==
Gokey started singing with his family in church, but stated he would rather record mainstream music than perform solely Christian/gospel music. He was the worship director at his church in Milwaukee, Faith Builders International Ministries, for several years.He is the fifth of six children.  He has a brother named Charles, and four sisters: Angela, Janell, Gina, and Tracey.He has acknowledged the influence of Jeffrey and Robin Pruitt, who are the pastors of the church he worked at, and also Matthew Barnett, the founder of the LA Dream Center.  He has stated that his faith is the "key to who I am". Gokey was a church music director, while also driving a semi truck (18 wheeler) for a local logistics company for two years.


== American Idol ==


=== Overview ===
Gokey rose to national fame with his participation in the eighth season of American Idol. Gokey's American Idol audition occurred only four weeks after his wife's death in July 2008.During Rock Week (Top 4 week), Gokey's take on Aerosmith's "Dream On" was planned for the extended scream with which he finished the song. Gokey was the only contestant in that season who was never in the bottom two or three, but he was eliminated in third place on May 13, 2009, after his performance of Joe Cocker's "You Are So Beautiful."
During the season 8 finale on May 20, 2009, Gokey performed a duet with R&B superstar Lionel Richie. The performance opened with Gokey singing a true-to-the-original soulful ballad solo of Richie's "Hello," and then Richie joined Gokey for a duet of his hits "Just Go" and "All Night Long".


=== Performances/results ===


== Post-Idol career ==

Gokey was nominated in his home state of Wisconsin for a WAMI (Wisconsin Area Music Industry) Award for Best Christian/Gospel Artist of the Year.As of September 2009, Gokey finished his tour with the other idols on the American Idols LIVE! Tour 2009, and he worked on his foundation, Sophia's Heart, which was set up to help disadvantaged children.Gokey, known for his many pairs of eyeglasses that he often wore on the show, had stated he might start an eyewear line to help raise funds for his foundation and Match Eyewear teamed with him for the Danny Gokey Eyewear collection. Launched in March 2012, the collection has exceeded sales projections with over 1.7 million in net retail sales.


=== 2009–2010: My Best Days ===
On September 1, 2009, Gokey signed with 19 Recordings/RCA Nashville, becoming the first third-place finisher to record with 19 and the first male Idol to be signed to a major country label. On November 19, 2009, 19 Recordings and RCA Records announced the release of the debut single "My Best Days Are Ahead of Me". Gokey's debut album, My Best Days, was released on March 2, 2010. It debuted on the Billboard charts at number four, and it netted Gokey the best opening-week sales by a debut country male in 18 years and the highest debut of digital downloads sold by any new country artist ever. In support of the album, Gokey was the opening act on Sugarland's Incredible Machine tour which began in April. Gokey also performed at country singer Darryl Worley's ninth annual Tennessee River Run festival in Savannah, Tennessee along with other artists such as Joe Diffie and Lee Brice. The event helped raise $200,000 for the Darryl Worley Foundation.On October 18, 2010, Gokey earned a nomination for Best New/Breakthrough Artist at the first annual American Country Awards. On November 21, 2010, Gokey was a part of ABC's pre-show event at the American Music Awards.


=== 2011–2013: Love Again and label change ===
Gokey released the single "Second Hand Heart" penned by Cary Barlowe, Shane Stevens and Josh Kear on July 4, 2011. He was one of opening acts on Taylor Swift's Speak Now World Tour. He also made an appearance in a TV movie with Candace Cameron Bure called Truth Be Told.Gokey left RCA Nashville in November 2011.Gokey released his EP Love Again in May 2012. It was self-released limitedly via his official website only as physical CD format. His memoir, Hope in Front of Me: Find Purpose in Your Darkest Moments, was published on October 1, 2013.


=== 2014–2018:  Hope in Front of Me, Christmas Is Here and Rise ===

Gokey kicked off 2014 with the release of his new single "Hope in Front of Me" under BMG.Gokey's second album, Hope in Front of Me, was released on June 23 and debuted at number one on the Billboard  Christian Albums chart.In late August, "Hope in Front of Me" topped both the Billboard Christian Airplay chart (lasted 3 weeks) and Mediabase Christian Adult Contemporary chart.
For the week ending of September 20, it also topped the Billboard Christian AC Songs chart.On December 5, the official lyric video for the second single "More Than You Think I Am" was released.
In the spring of 2015, Gokey joined Natalie Grant's Burn Bright tour as a special guest, followed by The Bible Tour 2015 with Steven Curtis Chapman, Brandon Heath and Francesca Battistelli."Hope in Front of Me" was nominated for Song of the Year at K-LOVE Fan Awards 2015, held on May 31 and one of award-winning songs at 2015 BMI Christian Awards, held on June 23.In July, "More Than You Think I Am" peaked at No. 6 on the Billboard Christian Airplay chart.
In August, Gokey earned nominations for New Artist of the Year and Song of the Year for "Hope in Front of Me" at 46th GMA Dove Awards.On September 25, Gokey released the lead single "Lift Up Your Eyes" from his holiday album, Christmas Is Here, which was released on October 16. In October, Gokey joined NewSong's Beating Hearts Tour with Mandisa. In December, Gokey joined the 2015 K-LOVE Christmas Tour as a special guest.Rise, received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Contemporary Christian Music Album.


=== 2019-present: Haven't Seen It Yet and Jesus People ===
On April 12, 2019, Gokey released the album Haven't Seen It Yet, and weeks later it reached #2 on the Billboard Top Christian Albums chart, and #1 on the Billboard Top Christian Albums chart. Christian Airplay.Gokey announced the second edition of The Hope Encounter Tour, which went to 31 cities and began on September 26.In November, Gokey was nominated for a Grammy Award at the 62nd Grammy Awards, and was the winner of a Dove Award for Short Form Music Video Of The Year.In 2020, he has released the Spanish versions of his songs "Love God, Love People" (which in Spanish is called "Ama A Dios Y A Tu Vecino" singing with Evan Craft and Redimi2) and " Haven't Seen It Yet" (which in Spanish is called "No Lo Has Visto Aún" singing with Lilly Goodman), in addition to previously releasing the radio version of "Love God Love People".
Gokey welcomed the year 2021 by releasing the radio version of "New Day".Gokey released in April of the same year the song "We All Need Jesus" with Koryn Hawthorne, being the first single from his next album "Jesus People", he also did the Spanish version of the song, which was titled "Cristo Es Necesario" and this time singing with Christine D'Clario.In the middle of the year, he released the third single from the Jesus People album "Stand In Faith" (the single that was the inspiration for the name of the Stand In Faith Tour (with Colton Dixon)) and the promotional single "He Believes In You"; Between July and August, he released more promotional singles, such as "Agradecido" and "Do For Love (with Angie Rose)". In the first week of August, Gokey released 2 new official videos, which were for the songs "Stand In Faith" and "Do For Love" with Angie Rose.On August 20, Gokey released his album Jesus People, in which he experimented with singing with various genres, such as Latin pop, classical music and dance-pop. The album peaked at number 1 on the Billboard Top Christian Albums chart.As of January 2022, the album has garnered over 50 million streams across all music platforms.


== Personal life ==
Gokey married his high school sweetheart, Sophia Martinez, on May 15, 2004. The two had been together since 1997.
On July 9, 2008, four weeks before he auditioned for American Idol, Gokey's wife died from complications during her third surgery to treat her congenital heart disease. The couple had been together for 12 years, and Gokey credited her for his success. Sophia was a fan of American Idol and encouraged Gokey to be a contestant, and Danny started a foundation in her name, Sophia's Heart Foundation, with some of her family members who are also musicians. With branches in Milwaukee, Nashville and Sacramento, the organization's goals are to provide hope and help to homeless families, provide scholarships to deserving students and operate a thriving inner-city music and arts program.
In 2011, Gokey began dating Leyicet Peralta. The two announced their engagement on December 25, 2011 on the Sophia's Heart website. They were married on January 29, 2012. Their son Daniel Emanuel was born on January 20, 2013. Their daughter Victoria Isabella was born on November 28, 2014. Their son Gabriel Daniel was born on August 29, 2017. On Aug 16, 2019, their fourth child,  Emmanuel, was born on the birthday of Danny's first wife.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Discography ==

My Best Days (2010)
Hope in Front of Me (2014)
Christmas Is Here (2015)
La Esperanza Frente a Mi (2016)
Rise (2017)
Haven't Seen It Yet (2019)
The Greatest Gift: A Christmas Collection (2019)
Jesus People (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Sophia's Heart Foundation (Official charity website)