The Nymphs were an American alternative rock band that performed in the late 1980s and early 1990s with lead singer Inger Lorre. The band was signed to Geffen Records, and released their debut album in 1991. The Nymphs are known for their wild stage shows and their rebellious attitude towards record companies. The band formed in 1985 and broke up in 1992, formed again in 2016, and broke up the same year, later reforming in 2017.


== Members (past and present) ==
Inger Lorre - (Vocals)
Sam Merrick - (Guitar)
Cliff D. (aka Cliff Jones) - (Bass)
Alex Kirst - (Drums) (Died 2011)
Geoff Siegel - (Lead Guitar)
Mario Tremaine - (Guitar)
Morpheus Black - (Guitar)
Jordan Lawson - (Bass)
Aaron Cruz - (Guitar)
Eric James Contreras - (Drums)
Angelique Congleton - (Bass)
Thomas "TJ" Jefferson - (Guitar)


== Band history ==
Lorre and Bobby Belltower formed the band in New Jersey in the mid 1980s. The band moved to Los Angeles to pursue their musical careers, and after two members returned to New Jersey, Lorre and Siegel recruited guitarist Sam Merrick, drummer Alex Kirst and bass player Cliff D. (Cliff Jones).The band was hoping to sign with an alternative label such as Alternative Tentacles, but their reputation led to interest from the major labels. However, the band's wild behavior led to some companies losing interest.The Nymphs made an appearance in the 1990 film Bad Influence as a band playing in a club.Iggy Pop sang vocals on the track "Supersonic" from the debut album.Things came to a head when Inger Lorre performed fellatio on her then-boyfriend, Rodney Eastman, on stage during their set at the Marquis club in Anaheim, California in 1992. Shortly afterwards, Lorre was fired from the band after she refused to go onstage during a concert that year in Miami opening for Peter Murphy. The band broke up soon after.
After the Nymphs, Inger Lorre went on to record with Jeff Buckley and release solo albums. Alex Kirst went on to play drums for Iggy Pop. Geoff Siegel went on to do A&R for Columbia and Giant records. Sam Merrick briefly returned to his original band, Leaving Trains.  He now plays guitar in Boise, Idaho based band a.k.a. Belle.
Alex Kirst died on January 13, 2011 as the result of a car accident. His body was found just before midnight near Date Palm and Gerald Ford Drive in Cathedral City, California. He was 47.  Kirst is the brother of guitarist Whitey Kirst, who has also played with Iggy Pop.In the summer of 2016, Inger Lorre announced The Nymphs were re-forming and going back into the studio with new material for the first time in over 20 years. A new album and touring would follow. The news spread through various magazines, television interviews and online social media. The new band lineup would bring back Inger Lorre (vocals) with all new members including Mario Tremaine (guitar), Jordan Lawson (bass), Aaron Cruz (guitar) and Eric James Contreras (drums). However, after several brief studio rehearsals, a cover of Dolly Parton's Hard Candy Christmas for Amazon, and an appearance at The Viper Room in Hollywood, California, the newly formed Nymphs called it quits almost as quickly as they got started.
November 18, 2016 a reissue of the Nymphs' one and only Geffen release from 1991, now an underground classic was released by Rock Candy Records in celebration of the 25th anniversary of the original Geffen release. The reissue was remastered and included a 16-page full-color booklet containing a 3,500 word essay, enhanced artwork with previously unseen photos, interviews and band history.
As of April 2017 the Nymphs lineup consists of Inger Lorre (vocals-keyboards), Joe Perez (lead guitar), T.J. (rhythm guitar), Angelique Congleton (bass-vocals) and Eric James Contreras (drums). The new Nymphs lineup is writing/rehearsing/recording new material to be released and for an upcoming European tour. A live recording from a 2016 show at the famous Viper Room in Hollywood was released in 2017.


== Discography ==
The Nymphs (1991) Geffen 36,000
A Practical Guide to Astral Projection (1992) Geffen 5,000


== References ==


== External links ==
The Nymphs at AllMusic
Inger Lorre biography at worldwildtribe.com