Erik Rutan (born June 10, 1971) is an American heavy metal musician and producer from New Jersey.  He is the guitarist and lead vocalist of Hate Eternal and lead guitarist for Cannibal Corpse, who he fully joined in 2021 after acting as a fill-in guitarist during their 2019 tour. Rutan has also spent time with Morbid Angel (three different stints) and Ripping Corpse.  When not performing, Rutan operates his own recording studio in Florida called Mana Recording Studios.


== Recording ==

Rutan started his metal career with Ripping Corpse, recording one album titled Dreaming with the Dead released in 1991. Around 1995, he left to join Morbid Angel, recording Domination (1995) before leaving in 1996 to found his own band, Hate Eternal, releasing their first album Conquering the Throne in 1999. Rutan then returned to Morbid Angel to record Gateways to Annihilation, released in 2000. Rutan left Morbid Angel again to concentrate on Hate Eternal, releasing King of All Kings in 2002 and I, Monarch in 2005. He rejoined Morbid Angel once more for the band's 2006 summer tour of Europe, a move about which the other band members said, "This will certainly be an exciting event with the Domination lineup together for the first time in 10 years!" The tour included a stop at the Wacken Open Air festival.
Rutan has had a number of side projects that highlight different aspects of his playing. For example, he formed the group Alas with former the Therion vocalist Martina Astner, releasing the landmark progressive metal album Absolute Purity in 2001.
Rutan is a guest vocalist on the track "Bone Crown" on Annotations of an Autopsy's second full-length album, II: The Reign of Darkness.
On January 18, 2019, it was announced that Rutan would fill in for Pat O'Brien of Cannibal Corpse for the remainder of their winter and spring tour dates. Rutan was officially announced as a permanent member of the band on February 2, 2021 and appears on their fifteenth studio album Violence Unimagined.


== Production ==
Rutan has produced the following albums:

Belphegor: Conjuring the Dead
Cannibal Corpse: Kill, Evisceration Plague, Torture, Red Before Black, Violence Unimagined
Madball: Empire
Agnostic Front: My Life My Way
Six Feet Under: Commandment
Annotations of an Autopsy: II: The Reign of Darkness
Morbid Angel: Illud Divinum Insanus (drum production), Kingdoms Disdained
Soilent Green: Inevitable Collapse in the Presence of Conviction, Confrontation
Through the Eyes of the Dead: Malice
Goatwhore: A Haunting Curse, Carving Out The Eyes of God, Blood for the Master, Constricting Rage of the Merciless
Vital Remains: Icons of Evil
Malevolent Creation: Invidious Dominion (co-producer)
Nile: Those Whom the Gods Detest (drum production)
Krisiun: Conquerors of Armageddon, Forged in Fury
Pessimist: Slaughtering The Faithful
Internal Suffering: Internal Suffering, Awakening of the Rebel
Premonitions of War: Left In Kowloon
Aeon: Path of Fire (mixing)
In Battle: Welcome to the Battlefield
The Absence: From Your Grave
Pathology: Legacy of the Ancients
Avulsed: Gorespattered Suicide
Into The Moat: The Design, The Campaign (album)
Torture Killer: Swarm! (mixing)
Pain Principle: Waiting For The Flies
Covenance: Ravaging The Pristine
Ophiolatry: Anti-Evangelistic Process
Devourment: Conceived in Sewage
The Mountain Goats: All Eternals Deck (four songs)
Masacre: Total Death
Tombs: Savage Gold
Ephel Duath: Hemmed By Light, Shaped By Darkness, On Death and Cosmos
Rivers of Nihil: The Conscious Seed of Light


== References ==