Rengim Gokmen (born August 19, 1955) is a Turkish conductor. He is the Principal Conductor and Artistic Director of Presidential Symphony Orchestra and General Director of Turkish State Opera and Ballet.


== Early life and education ==
Gökmen was born in Istanbul, Turkey in 1955. He had his first music lessons from his family and was admitted to the piano section of the Ankara State Conservatory in 1964. Subsequently, he was admitted to the Composition section of the same conservatory and there he studied with İlhan Baran and Adnan Saygun. He graduated from these sections in 1974.
In 1975 Gökmen was awarded with a scholarship by the Turkish Government to continue his studies on orchestra conducting in Rome. He became the student of orchestra conducting class in Santa Cecilia Conservatory. In the meantime he made advanced studies on violin which he had started in Turkey. Subsequently, he was admitted to the course for advanced studies in orchestra conducting in Santa Cecilia National Academy under the direction of Franco Ferrara. He received his diploma from Santa Cecilia Conservatory in 1978 and in the same year he qualified for ‘’Diploma di Merito’’ by Accademia Chigiana in Siena. In 1979, Gökmen completed his advanced studies at Academy of Santa Cecilia. His achievements qualified him to conduct a concert with Orchestra Nazionale dell’ Accademia di Santa Cecilia at Via della Conciliazione.
He also attended summer courses on orchestra conducting in Austria, England and Netherlands.


== Career ==
In July 1980, he won Gino Marinuzzi contest for young international conductors. Then he conducted many orchestras both in Turkey and in Europe.
During 1984 - 1989 season, he served as the General Music Director of Ankara State Opera an Ballet. In 1989 he has been awarded ‘’Cavalleria in ordine di Merito’’ by the Italian Government. Between 1991-2006 he was the music director and the principal conductor of Izmir State Symphony Orchestra. Meanwhile he also conducted concerts and made recordings in Turkey and in abroad with Izmir State Symphony Orchestra.
He held the position as the General Director of Turkish State Opera and Ballet between 1992–1995 and awarded by TÜTAV in Turkey due to his exemplar contributions to the presentation of Turkey abroad.
In 1999, Turkish Presidential Culture and Art Prize and in 2000, Gold Medal of ‘’Foyer des Artistes’’ in Rome, Italy are presented to Gökmen.
He is a member of the Advisory Committee of Ankara and Istanbul International Art Festivals. Beside his intensive program in Turkey, he continues to conduct orchestras in Europe regularly.
Gokmen also teaches conducting at Hacettepe University Ankara State Conservatory.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website
MySpace Page
Turkish State Opera and Ballet
Presidential Symphony Orchestra