Katherine Elaine Anderson Schaffner (born January 16, 1944) is an American singer, famed for her tenure in the Motown all-female singing group the Marvelettes. Though not known for any lead spots acquired by Gladys Horton, Wanda Young, or Ann Bogan, Schaffner's role was as notable as she was the only member to survive the group's several incarnations that occurred during the 1960s until breaking up in 1970.


== Biography ==
Although born in Ann Arbor, Michigan, Katherine Anderson was raised in the Detroit suburb of Inkster, Michigan, where she developed a fondness for singing in her teens. In 1960, she helped to form a group with fellow high schoolers Gladys Horton, Georgia Dobbins and her friends Juanita Cowart and Georgeanna Tillman.
The group named themselves the Casinyets and began performing at local high-schools and basement parties before finally landing an important audition at Motown where, already changing their name to the Marvels, they performed a rendition of a song that Dobbins had co-written called "Please Mr. Postman". It became Motown's first No. 1 pop hit. Fellow Inkster High class mate Wanda Young replaced Dobbins and the group recorded "Please Mr. Postman" in 1961 signing to Motown as the Marvelettes.
Anderson was in the background throughout her tenure in the Marvelettes while Horton and Young each sung lead vocals on the Marvelettes songs. The first departure after Dobbins left occurred in 1962 when Cowart quit. Two years later, due to an impending marriage and battles with sickle cell and lupus, Tillman also resigned. In 1968, Gladys Horton left the group citing marriage as the reason for her departure and was replaced by Ann Bogan.
In 1970, the Marvelettes split up; Anderson quit show business. When Gladys Horton wanted to reform the group, Anderson, who was married to Joe Schaffner, declined to join.
In 1995, the Marvelettes won a Pioneer Award at the R&B Foundation Awards. In 2004, they were inducted to the Vocal Group Hall of Fame. The following year, the Marvelettes classic singles "Please Mr. Postman" and "Don't Mess With Bill" each received million-selling Gold certifications by the RIAA.
Of all the original Marvelettes, Katherine is the most active today. Katherine retired from singing when the Marvelettes group disbanded in 1970. She became very involved in helping troubled teenagers in the Detroit area. She is the mother of two adult daughters.  Kat still resides in Inkster as of 2021.
Katherine was present for Motown's 50th Anniversary celebration, held at the historic Roostertail nightclub in downtown Detroit, on November 21, 2009.
The Marvelettes were nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2013 and again in 2015.


== See also ==
Too Many Fish in the Sea


== References ==