Vishakha Hari is a Carnatic music vocalist and proponent of Harikatha, a form of Hindu storytelling. 


== Early days ==
Vishakha Hari's father, Santhanam, is a chartered accountant. Her mother, Vijaya Santhanam, completed studies in chemistry and followed a spiritual guru, Sri Paranur Krishna Premi (Srisrianna), who later became Visakha Hari's father-in-law. Her younger brother Saketharaman is also a Carnatic music vocalist.
Vishakha Hari received formal Carnatic music training from Lalgudi Jayaraman from the age of 6 and Bharata natyam training from Sudharani Raghupathy. She had no formal training in Harikatha.Viskha Hari studied commerce and completed qualifications as a chartered accountant.She married Sri Hari, a Harikatha exponent, and when she was 22, her father-in-law encouraged her to tell stories during her musical performances.


== Musical career ==
Since 2006, Vishakha Hari has performed in several sabhas during the Chennai Music Season. An artist of All India Radio, she has given discourses and concerts abroad.
Vishakha Hari also occasionally performs with her husband, Sri Hari, who uses his English literary background to supplement her kathakalakshepam performances.Vishakha Hari performs Harikatha on various topics Based on Srimad Ramayanam, Srimad Bhagavatham and Skanda puranam. She also performs from Srisrianna's works such as: Sri Vaishnava Samhitha; Sri Brindavana Mahatmyam; Divya Desa Vaibhavam; Harikatha Amritha Lahari; Sri Bhakthapurisha Stavam; Sati vijayam, Shatakams and Keerthanas.


== Awards and recognition ==
She has received medals, prizes and other awards for her contributions to the Harikatha and Carnatic music fields.*

Received the Vasantashreshtha, that is the 'woman par excellence' award, from the hands of her music guru Sri Lalgudi Jayaraman and the ThyagarjaPratidhwani or 'echo of Thyagaraja Swami' title from her spiritual guru and father-in-law Sri Krishna Premi Swamigal.
Smt Vishaka hari was awarded Dr. M.S. Subbulakshmi Centenary Award at a ceremony in Mumbai Sri Shamukhananda Fine Arts and Sangeetha Sabha on 13th ofSeptember 2016.She is one amongst seven of India's most-respected women artistes.
On 20 November 2016, Bharitya Vidya Bhavan, Chennai decorated Smt Vishaka Hari with the  'Lifetime Achievement' award by the guest of the day Infosyschairman, R. Seshasayee.


== References ==