Dave Knudson (born October 13, 1976) is an American guitarist and founding member of Seattle based indie band Minus the Bear, as well as mathcore band Botch. Other credits include additional guitars on These Arms Are Snakes' album Oxeneers or The Lion Sleeps When Its Antelope Go Home. Since the breakup of Minus The Bear, Knudson has been working on solo material, with a release expected by the end of 2021.


== Equipment ==
Guitars
PRS McCarty guitar with two humbuckers (as seen in the above photo.)
PRS Custom 24 with trem/two humbuckers. Seen on the Omni tour.
Fender Jaguar Special HH Baritone Guitar. Used on Secret Country live
First Act Delia 22 fret guitar with two humbuckers.
Gibson Les Paul Classic Custom silverburst edition electric guitar.
PRS DGT, black with maple trim. Used on Fall '08 tour.
Amplifiers:
Mesa Boogie Lonestar with custom white Tolex through a Mesa Boogie 2X12" extension cabinet
Fender Twin Reverb (used as rental abroad)
both amps are now used in conjunction in Knudson's Rig.
Effects pedals:
4 × Line 6 DL-4s (Knudson also keeps three additional DL-4s as backups, and there are 8 on stage in total between Dave, Jake, and Cory. He will use the sampling abilities of multiple DL-4s at once. Examples are a plenty on Planet of Ice)
Strymon Timeline Delay
Enema FX Mingebox (custom made fuzz and octave effect)
Ibanez TS9 Tube Screamer
Fulltone OCD overdrive (used for the recording of Planet of Ice in place of the Tubescreamer, though not on tour)
Digitech Whammy
BOSS RC-3 Loop Station (added in 2007)
BOSS DD-20 Giga Delay
BOSS GE-7 EQ
BOSS CS-3 compressor
Barber Tone Press compressor
FMR Really Nice compressor (no longer used live.)
Electro-Harmonix HOG Guitar Synthesizer with foot controller (added in 2007, can be heard on "Burying Luck".)
Dunlop Cry Baby
Misc
Suzuki Omnichord (The Minus the Bear album "Omni" is named after this instrument.)


== Technique ==

Dave Knudson is well known for his use of two-handed tapping. He uses this technique to create polyphony (countermelodies), whereby his right hand will tap a treble melody, whilst his left hand plays a bass accompaniment. This technique is most apparent on the album Highly Refined Pirates, where it is used on every single song (except the electronic interludes.)
Dave is also known for his use of the Line 6 DL-4 delay modeller's sampler capability. The DL-4 can be used to record a phrase which can then be played back instantly by stepping on one of the DL-4's buttons. The sample can also be reversed, slowed down or sped up, effects which Dave makes use of both in the studio (notably on Menos El Oso), but can also be replicated live. Dave can often be heard recording and preparing the samples before the start of songs when playing live.


== Graphic design ==
On top of playing and touring with Minus the Bear, Dave has also designed the artwork for the band's releases and the majority of apparel, as well as artwork for other bands such as Pretty Girls Make Graves.


== References ==


== External links ==
Minus the Bear
Botch on Myspace