Nathan Peter Larson (born September 12, 1970) is an American guitarist, singer, songwriter, and author widely known for his numerous film score compositions. He is married to Nina Persson, the lead singer of the Swedish rock band The Cardigans.
Larson is responsible for arranging 12-hour experimental music concert events, and is one of the founders of the LUMEN PROJECT.In May 2011, Larson's debut novel, The Dewey Decimal System, was published by Akashic Books. The second book in the series was published summer 2012, and is entitled The Nervous System. The third and final installment in this series, The Immune System, was published in 2015.


== Music career ==
Maryland-born Larson was the lead guitarist for the 1990s band Shudder to Think, and the original bassist for the hardcore punk band Swiz. Larson was also the creative force behind the group Mind Science of the Mind, and founder of the band Hot One.Larson and his wife Nina Persson have also been frequent musical collaborators, Persson providing vocals on several of Larson's film soundtracks, and Larson being a member of Persson's A Camp project and of the band on her solo album Animal Heart. Larson is also credited as co-writer of several songs on The Cardigans' 2005 album (and last to date), Super Extra Gravity.He has produced albums for The Ark, Angela McCluskey's THE THINGS WE DO (Manhattan / Blue Note), among other work.
Larson is one of the co-founders of the Subchamber Ensmble, an experimental chamber music group.
In 2017, he was a co-founder of the international nonprofit LUMEN PROJECT,  which creates 6-24 hour sound and light events.
In addition to his work with "drone music" concerts, Larson is also a prolific film composer and has contributed to over 60 scores, as well as music for such series as HBO's VINYL and Show Me a Hero.


== Select discography ==
SoloJealous God (Artemis Records, 2001)
FilmMusik (Commotion Records, 2004)With Shudder to ThinkYour Choice Live Series (Your Choice Records, 1992)
Pony Express Record (Big Cat UK Records, 1994)
50,000 B.C. (Sony Music, 1997)
High Art (Velvel Records, 1998)
First Love, Last Rites (1998)With Mind Science of the MindMind Science of the Mind (Sony Music, 1996)With A CampA Camp (Stockholm Records, 2001)
Colonia (Universal Records, 2009)With Hot OneHot One (Modern Imperial Records, 2006)Film scores


== Personal life ==
Larson is married to The Cardigans lead singer, Nina Persson. They wed in Malmö, Sweden. They have a son named Nils who was born on September 30, 2010. The couple formerly resided in New York City in the Manhattan neighborhood of Harlem, but currently reside in Malmö, Sweden. He was previously engaged to actress and musician Kerri Kenney-Silver.


== Awards ==
GRAS SAVOYE Award at Cannes 2004 for THE WOODSMAN score
the Georges Delerue Prize for the Best Music, Ghent Film Festival 2009, Belgium for A RATIONAL SOLUTION
Movieline's Young Hollywood Award for Best song in a motion picture (Velvet Goldmine)
Produced Emmy-award winning song for Nickelodeon's "Nickellinium”
The Deal received the BAFTA award for Best Television Drama


== References ==


== External links ==
Nathan Larson at IMDb
Lumen Project events
Larson interview regarding Lumen Project
The Dewey Decimal System at akashic books : plot summary and review blurbs
The Dewey Decimal System at A Camp : plot summary