Cobhams Asuquo (Efik pronunciation: [ˈko̞bʱäms äsˈuːku:wo̞]) (born January 6, 1981) is a Nigerian musician, producer, and songwriter. In 2005, Asuquo was signed on with Sony ATV London as a songwriter. After working as Head of Audio Productions at a local label, Questionmark Entertainment, he set up his own recording facility in 2006. He is the former CEO/ Head of Productions of CAMP (Cobhams Asuquo Music Productions) represented himself, Bez Idakula and Stan Iyke. He was responsible for Aşa's highly acclaimed international album ASA and has been mentioned on many artists' sleeve credits as producer and writer. He is now the Founder/CEO of Vintage Grey Media.


== Music career ==
Cobhams Emmanuel Asuquo is a Nigerian-born songwriter/music producer/singer who started his academic training as a lawyer. Previously signed to Sony/ATV UK publishing as a songwriter, Cobhams formed his first music production and label company Cobhams Asuquo Music Production (CAMP) in 2008. In 2016 he started Vintage Gray Media Ltd.  Vintage Gray Media Ltd. produced 74 episodes of "The Top 12 Countdown with Cobhams Asuquo" – a music countdown show aimed at showcasing new music.
Cobhams’ international acclaim came with the music production of Nigeria's soul performer – ASA’s debut album. He also wrote and co-wrote several songs on the album including the singles, "Fire on the Mountain" and "Jailer. He has worked with numerous musicians both local (Nigeria) and International. From the early 2000s production hit's ‘Maintain in India’ ‘Catch cold’ by Maintain;‘Ego’- Djinne ; ‘In the music’, ‘If you ask me’ by Omawumi to recently released 2017 butterflies also by Omawumi. His stable of artistes include : Asa, Banky W, Omawumi, Eldee, Sasha, Dare Art-Alade, Waje, Timi Dakolo, Djinne, Faze, Seyi Shay, Korede Bello, Tiwa Savage, Ego, Yemi Alade, Bez, Omolara, Chidinma Ekile, Shola Allyson, Lara George, Ego, Silver Saddih, Flavour, Mo'Chedda, Praiz, Simi, Rooftop MC's and so many others. Cobhams became an MTN Nigeria ambassador for its corporate elite customers in 2015.
He has arranged music, and performed with bands at international music events such as The Harare International Festival of Arts, the AFA Sponsored French Cultural Center Concert with Asa and Angelique Kidjo; AFA Sponsored French Cultural Center Concert in Johannesburg, South Africa; Nigeria Week in Paris and the launch of MTV's one hundredth channel (MTV Base Africa) at Abuja, Nigeria. In the TV and film media, he has composed and arranged film scores to be interpreted for conservatoires as well as for film and stage performances such as "A Voice for Ella" by Uche Macaulay, Sunshine (Alpha Vision), "Bent Arrows" by Isang Awah and Communication for Change's "Bayelsan Sillhouttes.”
Cobhams performed with other renowned Nigerian artists at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland in January 2014. CNN Africa Voices featured Cobhams in a full-length interview in December 2011.
Cobhams, alongside African musicians such as Dbanj, Omawumi, Femi Kuti and Somi, visited the white house to raise awareness on agriculture in Nigeria, through Bono’s global humanitarian group, ‘ONE Campaign’. He was also invited to participate in the three-day US-Africa summit. Cobhams was invited by the ONE campaign to produce the anthem for the "Poverty is Sexist’ campaign titled Strong Girl. He teamed up with various African female artists such as: Waje (Nigeria), Victoria Kimani (Kenya), Vanessa Mdee (Tanzania), Arielle T (Gabon), Gabriela (Mozambique), Yemi Alade (Nigeria), Selmor Mtukudzi (Zimbabwe), Judith Sephuma (South Africa), new talents Blessing Nwafor (South Africa) and the video star Omotola Jolade- Ekehinde (Nigeria).
Cobhams was called again to produce a remix of "StrongGirl" and this time it included Bono as one of the artistes. Cobhams was also invited to be part of the UN Global Goals campaign and co-produced the song "Tell Everyone". The song featured various African artistes such as Sautisol (Kenya), Mafikizolo (South Africa), Yemi Alade (Nigeria) and Diamond Platnumz (Tanzania). On September 26, Cobhams performed live on stage at the Global Citizens Festival New York Central Park with several International artistes including Pearl Jam, Beyonce, Common, Coldplay, and Ed Sheeran to promote the UN Global Goals. Cobhams was a producer on the Coke Studio Africa Season 3 show, which aired across various African countries. In 2016 Cobhams produced the Rhythm Unplugged show and Hennessy Artistry. He also produced the first "One Africa" concert in Houston Texas. Cobhams met with artiste and a former member if the group Fugees – Wyclef Jean.
On the first of January 2015, Cobhams released his first music video for "Ordinary People". He has also officially released 5 other singles – "Do the Right Thing" featuring Bez (2015), Christmas song "Star of Wonder" (2015), Boosit ft. Falz (2016), "The Other Room" ft. Ugovinna (2016) and "Adore" ft. Lauretta Cookey and Fome Peters (2016).


== Singles ==
His latest single is "We Plenti" featuring Simi, released on January 6, 2019.
Cobham's released his first official single "Ordinary People" on January 1, 2014, and released the video the following January. Star of Wonder released in December 2014 is his second officially released single. His third single Stronger Than Before was released in 2015 and was sung by Morayo. He released his fourth single Boosit featuring Falz in April 2016


== Production work ==
Asuquo also wrote and co-wrote several songs on the album including the singles, "Fire on the Mountain", and "Jailer".
Asuquo has likewise produced songs for Nigerian recording artistes such as Banky W and Omawumi.He has arranged music, and performed with bands at international music events as The Harare International Festival of Arts, the AFA Sponsored French Cultural Center Concert with Asa and Angelique Kidjo; AFA Sponsored French Cultural Center Concert in Johannesburg, South Africa; Nigeria Week in Paris and the launch of MTV's one hundredth channel (MTV Base Africa) at Abuja, Nigeria.
In the TV and film media, he has composed and arranged film scores to be interpreted for conservatoires as well as for film and stage performances such as "A Voice for Ella" by Uche Macaulay, Sunshine (Alpha Vision), "Bent Arrows" by Isang Awah and Communication For Change's "Bayelsan Sillhouttes".In 2016, Asuquo started a digital radio countdown show. The digital radio show counts down the hottest African/Nigerian songs that Asuquo thinks the Nigerian audience should be listening to. The show is called The Top 12 Countdown With Cobhams Asuquo.


== Personal life ==
Asuquo is visually impaired. On December 2, 2010, Cobhams Emmanuel Asuquo married Ojuolape Veronica Olukanni. They have two sons together.


== See also ==
List of Nigerian gospel musicians


== References ==


== External links ==
CNN story on Cobhams Asuquo