Poul William Anderson (November 25, 1926 – July 31, 2001) was an American science fiction author from the 1940s until the 21st century. Anderson wrote fantasy novels, historical novels, and short stories. His awards include seven Hugo Awards and three Nebula Awards.


== Biography ==
Poul Anderson was born on November 25, 1926, in Bristol, Pennsylvania to Scandinavian parents. Shortly after his birth, his father, Anton Anderson moved the family to Texas, where they lived for over ten years. Following Anton Anderson's death, his widow took the children to Denmark. The family returned to the United States after the outbreak of World War II, settling eventually on a Minnesota farm.
While he was an undergraduate student at the University of Minnesota, Anderson's first stories were published by John W. Campbell in Astounding Science Fiction: "Tomorrow's Children" by Anderson and F. N. Waldrop in March 1947 and a sequel, "Chain of Logic" by Anderson alone, in July. He earned his B.A. in physics with honors but became a freelance writer after he graduated in 1948. He placed his third story in the December Astounding.Anderson married Karen Kruse in 1953 and moved with her to the San Francisco Bay area. Their daughter Astrid (now married to science fiction author Greg Bear) was born in 1954. They made their home in Orinda, California. Over the years Poul gave many readings at The Other Change of Hobbit bookstore in Berkeley; his widow later donated his typewriter and desk to the store.In 1965, Algis Budrys said that Anderson "has for some time been science fiction's best storyteller". He was a founding member of the Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA) in 1966 and of the Swordsmen and Sorcerers' Guild of America (SAGA), also in the mid-1960s. The latter was a loosely-knit group of Heroic Fantasy authors led by Lin Carter, originally eight in number, with entry by credentials as a fantasy writer alone. Anderson was the sixth President of Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, taking office in 1972.
Robert A. Heinlein dedicated his 1985 novel The Cat Who Walks Through Walls to Anderson and eight of the other members of the Citizens' Advisory Council on National Space Policy. The Science Fiction Writers of America made Anderson its 16th SFWA Grand Master in 1998 and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2000, its fifth class of two deceased and two living writers. He died of prostate cancer on July 31, 2001, after a month in the hospital. A few of his novels were first published posthumously.


== Awards and honors ==
Gandalf Grand Master of Fantasy (1978)
Hugo Award (seven times)
John W. Campbell Memorial Award (2000)
Inkpot Award (1986)
Locus Award (41 nominations; one win, 1972)
Mythopoeic Fantasy Award (one win (1975))
Nebula Award (three times)
Pegasus Award (best adaptation, with Anne Passovoy) (1998)
Prometheus Award (five times, including Special Prometheus Award for Lifetime Achievement in 2001)
SFWA Grand Master (1997)
Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame (2000)
Asteroid 7758 Poulanderson, discovered by Eleanor Helin at Palomar in 1990, was named in his honor. The official naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center shortly after his death on 2 September 2001 (M.P.C. 43381).


== Bibliography ==


== See also ==
 Speculative fiction portal


== Explanatory notes ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== General references ===


== External links ==
Bio, bibliography and book covers at FantasticFiction
Obituary and tributes from the SFWA
Poul Anderson Appreciation, by Dr. Paul Shackley
Poul Anderson, an essay by William Tenn
The Society for Creative Anachronism, of which Poul Anderson was a founding member
The King of Ys review at FantasyLiterature.net
"Poul Anderson biography". Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame.
Poul Anderson at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Poul Anderson at the Internet Book List
Poul Anderson at Curlie
Poul Anderson at Library of Congress Authorities, with 134 catalog recordsBy Poul AndersonWorks by Poul Anderson in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
Works by Poul Anderson at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Poul Anderson at Internet Archive
Works by Poul Anderson at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Poul Anderson at Open Library 
On Thud and Blunder, an essay by Anderson on fantasy fiction, from the SFWA
Poul Anderson's online fiction at Free Speculative Fiction Online
SFWA directory of literary estates