Owen Paul (born 1 May 1962) is a Scottish singer best known in the UK for his 1986 No. 3 hit single, "My Favourite Waste of Time", a cover version of a song that was originally written and recorded by American singer-songwriter Marshall Crenshaw.  The track featured an appearance from future Thunder bass player Mark 'Snake' Luckhurst.
After releasing a couple of singles and the album As It Is, he had a falling out with his record label, resulting in him leaving the music industry for 15 years.


== Biography ==
As a youngster, Paul was taken on as an apprentice with the football club Celtic, but after hearing the Sex Pistols he decided to pursue a career in music. In the early 80s he played and sang with Glasgow band Venigmas, who released the single "Strangelove".In 1989, he produced Japanese rock band Buck-Tick's album Taboo.
Owen Paul has made two memorable television appearances. The first was on the BBC live programme Pebble Mill, when he was meant to mime to "My Favourite Waste of Time" but missed his cue due to a technician's mistake. The second came much later, when he was the unfortunate guest of a neighbour of the Osbournes. While playing music and singing in the garden, they provoked Ozzy and the rest of his family into throwing food over the fence in an attempt to quieten them.
For over ten years he ran a West End theatre in London's Leicester Square (home of the Boy George musical Taboo) as well as a successful ballroom and Latin dancing club, returning to the music scene in 2002 with the album About Time.
After touring and recording with Mike + The Mechanics he had a spell with Scottish supergroup Four Good Men and spent time as the lead vocalist for Ex-Simple Mind, with his brother, former Simple Minds drummer Brian McGee. In late 2012, Owen appeared on BBC1’s Watchdog as part of their ‘Rogue Traders’ team. In January 2014, Owen released "The One", his first official single in the UK since 1987, following this with the release of the album About Time II in the autumn of the same year.
He now tours as a solo artist and with his 80s band.
To celebrate the 30th Anniversary of his 1986 hit he released two new versions, "My Favourite Waste of Time Part One" and "My Favourite Waste of Time Part Two", along with various dance remixes. The Acoustic 80s EP was released in 2017. 
The dance version of "Amazing" was remixed by Stonebridge and spent 3 weeks in the Music Week Club Charts in 2018. 
"Sleeping on the Same Pillow" (featuring Lynne Johnstone) - released in January 2020 - was the first release from his forthcoming Americana/country album Overblown Superstar which is due for release in 2022 and sees a return to his celtic/folk roots. "Beauty of the Sun" - recorded entirely in lockdown reached number one in the Heritage Chart. 
He released a jam based on the chorus of My Favourite Waste of Time featuring Glen Matlock (Sex Pistols), Toyah, Carol Decker (T'pau), comedian Matt Lucas, Leee John (Imagination), Cheryl Baker (The Fizz), Celtic folk legends Phil Cunningham and John McCusker, session pros Gary Barnacle, Judd Lander and Matt Backer, Mick MacNeil from Simple Minds, Ezio, Bruce Watson from Big Country, members of The Alarm, Jake Burns from Stiff Little Fingers, Terry McDermott (The Voice runner up), and many many more.
Each guest improvised, recorded and filmed their parts remotely from their own lockdown situations.
His first Christmas song "This Christmas" reached the Heritage Chart top ten in December 2020, and was followed by the singles "Sparkle in the Rain", the 35th anniversary version of "My Favourite Waste of Time" (featuring John McCusker and Phil Cunningham on fiddle and accordion) and his latest single, "September" which got to number two in November 2021.
Owen has three children: Joshua, Olivia and Hannah.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
1986: As It Is
2002: About Time
2004: Rewired – Mike + the Mechanics (as backing vocalist and vocal arranger)
2014: About Time II
2017: Acoustic 80s EP
2021: Overblown Superstar


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
BBC - Ever wondered what happened to Owen Paul?
Official website