David Bisbal Ferre (born 5 June 1979) is a Spanish singer, songwriter, and actor. He gained his initial fame as a runner-up on the interactive reality television show Operación Triunfo.
He has since released five studio albums, all of which topped the Spanish Albums Chart, in addition to recording a number of live albums. He has toured throughout Europe and Latin America and is now considered to be a crossover international artist.
As of 2019, David Bisbal has sold more than six million records in Spain and America, getting 69 platinum albums, 20 gold and two diamond. Corazón Latino and Bulería have each received an IFPI Platinum Award, the official certification of having sold over one million copies across Europe.


== Early life ==
David Bisbal was born on 7 June 1979 in Almería, Spain. His parents are José Bisbal, a professional boxer who was Spanish national Bantamweight and Featherweight champion and part of a trio of flamenco musicians, and Maria Ferre Montoya. He is the youngest of three siblings, a brother named José María and a sister named María del Mar. As a child, Bisbal showed a talent for performing, but was always very shy about doing so in public.
Bisbal attended the secondary school IES Al-Andalus in Almería, but dropped out in his second to last year at around age 15. After dropping out, his father took him to work in a greenhouse in Almería, which was his first known job. A few years later he met the producer of Orchestra Expressions, a popular band in Almería. After listening to and discovering his vocal quality, the producer offered him employment as the main singer of the group.
Through his work in Orchestra Expressions, he gradually began to develop as a singer, and to discover his passion for music. David went on to audition for 'Pop Idol,' in Barcelona, Spain. In 2001, he was one of 16 contestants in the first Spanish edition of 'Idol' designed to choose the representative for the 'Eurovision' festival of that year. He came in second place to Rosa López. Bisbal then performed at Eurovision with Rosa López, David Bustamante, Chenoa, Gisela and Geno, in the chorus.


== Beginnings: Operación Triunfo ==
In October 2001 he auditioned for the first ever edition of Operación Triunfo (the Spanish version of Star Academy) where he was accepted and was one of the 16 contestants. He reached the final, where he placed as the runner-up to Rosa López. The top three contestants qualified for a secondary phase of the contest, where the prize was the chance of representing Spain in the Eurovision Song Contest. He came second in the Eurovision phase with the song "Corazón Latino", losing to Rosa López. She went on to sing "Europe's Living a Celebration" for Spain in the Eurovision Song Contest 2002 competition in Tallinn. Bisbal accompanied her there as a backing vocalist.


== Career ==
 
Bisbal signed a contract with Vale Music Record label and released his first album, recorded in Miami under the title Corazón Latino with producer and songwriter Kike Santander. The album went platinum 7 times by summer 2002, after having topped the Spanish charts. The first single from the album, called Ave María, had a phenomenal success. After winning a Latin Grammy, the album went platinum (over 1 million in sales).
On 10 February 2004, he released his second album entitled Bulería, again produced by his friend Kike Santander. It found similar success in Spain and throughout Latin America, hitting the diamond level with more than 1 million albums sold in Spain alone, and becoming the best Spanish seller of 2004.
In March 2005, he also released a DVD Todo Por Ustedes that contained live recordings of some of his concerts in the United States, Latin America and Spain.
Premonición was the third studio album by David Bisbal released on 3 October 2006. By the end of its first week of release, it had achieved enough sales to be certified as 5 times platinum with sales of over 400,000 copies in Spain alone.
On 20 October 2009, Bisbal released Sin Mirar Atrás, receiving positive reviews David worked with writer/producer DJ Sammy on the track "Aqui Ahora", which is featured on the album Premonición.


=== 2002–2003: International launch debut album ===
After achieving fame as Operación Triunfo finalist, he signed a contract with label Vale Music, offering him the opportunity to record his first solo debut album. The album, entitled Corazón Latino, was released in Summer 2002, recorded in Miami and produced by Kike Santander. The album reached number one in its debut week selling over 600,000 copies, breaking sales records; the album stayed for seven consecutive weeks at number one on the Spanish Albums Chart.
With more than 1,300,000 copies sold in Spain, Bisbal was launched to the rest of the Spanish-speaking world; his debut album would be released on 15 October. In January 2003, Bisbal received an Amigo award in Madrid's Palacio de Cristal de la Arganzuela.
On 31 October he began his first tour of Latin America in Argentina; he visited 12 countries and performed 17 live concerts. In November, a special issue of Corazón Latino was released in Mexico.


=== 2004–2005: Bulería, the second million record sales ===
The first single from Bisbal's second album, "Bulería", premiered on 15 December 2003. It reached number 1 on the charts and radio stations of both Spain and Latin America. On 11 February, the eponymous album was released. The album debuted on the charts in Spain, where more than 300,000 copies were sold in a week. It also reached gold certification in Colombia and Venezuela within two weeks.
He first set foot in Germany in November in order to promote his duet with singer Joana Zimmer. The duet's theme was "Let's make history". Several days after presenting the video with Joana Zimmer, David performed at the Tribute to Rocío Jurado Gala.


=== 2006–2008: Premonición and promotion in Europe and Japan ===
The first single of his third studio album Premonición, "Quién me iba a decir" was released in August 2006. The album was released on 3 October 2006. It sold more than 900,000 copies.
On 24 October he performed at the seat of European Parliament in Strasbourg in an exclusive concert in which he performed the songs from his album to representatives of 25 member countries. The album stayed for a month at number one on the Spanish chart. The singer won an Ondas Award in a ceremony held at the Barcelona Teatre Musical, and a Micrófono de Oro award. In January 2007, the second single from the album "Silencio" stayed for eight weeks at number one in Los 40 Principales, Spain's Top 40 Chart.
In 2008, Bisbal performed a duet with Rihanna, "Hate That I Love You", which was included in the re-issue of Good Girl Gone Bad.


=== 2009–2010: Sin Mirar Atrás ===
His fourth studio album Sin Mirar Atrás was released on 20 October 2009 in Spain, Latin America and the United States. The first single from the album was "Esclavo de tus Besos", under the production of Mexican-born Armando Ávila. Its world premiere was on 24 August and the video came out on 7 September. It was one of the most successful singles of the Spanish singer in his career, reaching number 1 on sales and radio charts in Spain, Latin America and the United States. On 9 January 2010 Promusicae announced that "Esclavo de Tus Besos" had earned a double platinum certification for its more than 80,000 copies sold in Spain, and it also earned a platinum certification in Argentina for more than 20,000 copies sold. The second single from the album was "Mi Princesa". The song "24 Horas" made with Mexican singer Espinoza Paz, was the third single in the U.S. and Latin America and was presented at the 2010 Billboard Awards, while in Spain the single was "Sin Mirar Atrás", a song that gave title to the album. Bisbal also won his first Latin Grammy in 2009. On 14 November 2010 he was presented the Gold Record for the sales of the album in USA and Puerto Rico.


=== 2011–2013: Herederos ===
David Bisbal sang the theme song for the soap opera "Herederos de una venganza".  It is one of the highest rated telenovelas in Argentina, which starred Romina Gaetani, Luciano Castro and Federico Amador, where all romantic moments are set to music by the song sung by David Bisbal. The songwriters of this release were Bisbal himself, Sebastian Bazan, and Karen Oliver.
On 5 November 2011 he released his first acoustic performance, a DVD/CD pack entitled "Una noche en el Teatro Real", recorded in the Madrid's main opera house, the Teatro Real (Royal Theatre), four days earlier. In its first week on sale, it set a record: the first time a DVD/CD set surpassed sales of CDs on the Spanish charts, selling more than 50,000 copies in seven days, and obtaining double platinum status. On 18 January, sales reached triple platinum, with more than 75,000 copies sold. In 2012, his CD "Live at the Royal Albert Hall" was certified platinum in Spain.
During the tour of "Una noche en el Teatro Real", Bisbal played in some of the most iconic theatres and auditoriums in Spain, North America, Latin America, and major European capitals. He played a total of 128 concerts in such unique venues as the Royal Albert Hall in London, Carnegie Hall in New York, and Luna Park in Buenos Aires. Writing about Bisbal's Albert Hall concert in September 2012, Boris Izaguirre described him as "the voice of Spanish emigrants" and "The Julio Iglesias of the lost generation", noting that many Spaniards in their twenties who had been forced by the financial crisis to emigrate had grown up during Bisbal's rise to fame in the previous decade's economic boom. On 15 November 2012, in Las Vegas, David Bisbal won his third Latin Grammy, this time in the category "Best Traditional Pop Album".
Bisbal's career took a turn towards its beginnings when he joined the Spanish reality talent show La Voz as a judge, acting as coach to eventual winner Rafa Blas in the first series. In addition he was a judge on La Voz... México on the third series of the show. However, in January 2014 after appearing on two seasons of the Spanish show and one of the Mexican edition, Bisbal announced he would leave these roles due to a heavy schedule of live and promotional work for his new album Tú y Yo. In mid-2016, he was a mentor on the show La Apuesta in which he was the winner with his fellow contestant Héctor Osobampo.
In 2017 Bisbal released the album Hijos del mar. Four singles were released: "Antes que no", "Duele demasiado", "Lo tenga o no" and "Fiebre". For the latter, Bisbal recorded a video clip in Los Angeles with Mexican vlogger Caeli and Spanish model Silvia Kal.In June 2018 Aitana was invited by David Bisbal to sing at the Palau Sant Jordi. Both sang Mi princesa, a song by Bisbal.In 2020, Carrie Underwood teamed up with David Bisbal for a new single, “Tears of Gold.” The song marks Underwood's first-ever bilingual single, with both vocalists singing in English and in Spanish.


== International appeal ==
Internationally, Bisbal enjoys popularity in a great number of countries.
On 3 September 2003, he won the Latin Grammy for "Best New Artist". During the event, He sang Angels, with Jessica Simpson. He also launched a big promotional tour in Latin America with sold-out concerts in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Venezuela and others.
In 2008, he recorded Hate That I Love You (Odio Amarte), a Spanglish version with Rihanna. He achieved European success in England, Germany, Belgium, Russia and Romania in addition to great success in Japan.
In 2009, he recorded "Sufriras" a Spanglish duet with singer Pixie Lott, eventually released as a platinum bonus track on the Deluxe Edition of his fourth studio album, Sin Mirar Atrás.
In 2010 David was featured in the Spanish version of the FIFA 2010 Official World Cup song Waving Flag with Somali-Canadian Musician K'naan who is the original artist of the song.
In 2010, A remix version of Miley Cyrus's When I Look At You, titled "Te miro a ti", was released on one of his albums in order to promote the release of The Last Song in Spain; in it, Cyrus sings her lines in English, while Bisbal's are mingled in both English and Spanish.
In 2011 David recorded a song for the TV series "Herederos" in Argentina. The song is called "Herederos" and David has sold over 300,000 copies of the cd "Sin Mirar Atrás Tour" in Argentina.
On 15 November 2012, he won the Latin Grammy held in Las Vegas from the category "Best Traditional Pop Album" for "Una Noche en el Teatro Real".
In 2013, Bisbal acted as himself in the TV series Jane the Virgin where he sang "Esclavo de sus besos" he appeared one episode.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Live albums ===


=== Compilation albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Other appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Universal Music Latin Entertainment | Davis Bisbal
Official website
Comunidad Gyggs
Concerts, News and Videoclips of Bisbal(in Spanish)
Interview with David Bisbal about his new album Premonición
David Bisbal at Acceso Total Show