Skaila Kanga (born in India) is a harpist and Professor Emerita of Harp at the Royal Academy of Music, London, England. After winning a Junior Exhibition to the Royal Academy of Music for piano, she switched to harp studies at age 17. She studied with Tina Bonifacio, Sir Thomas Beecham's harpist in the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra.


== Early career ==
Skaila began with the BBC Concert Orchestra, after which she went on to freelance with many London orchestras under such conductors as André Previn, Sir Georg Solti, Otto Klemperer, Evgeny Svetlanov, Simon Rattle, Sir Adrian Boult, Rudolf Kempe, Carlo Maria Giulini, Pierre Monteux, Bernard Haitink, Lorin Maazel, Zubin Mehta, Pierre Boulez and Daniel Barenboim.


== Solo career ==

Skaila's solo career has included many performances of concertos and broadcasts in the realms of records, films and television. She has worked for musical artists such as John Williams, Jerry Goldsmith, Michel Legrand, James Horner, Pat Metheny, Michael Nyman, Frank Sinatra, Barbra Streisand, Elton John, Luciano Pavarotti, Joan Sutherland, Plácido Domingo, José Carreras, Barbara Hendricks, Kiri Te Kanawa, Richard Rodney Bennett and many others.In 1977, Tommy Reilly and Skaila formed a duo for harmonica and harp which lasted 22 years. They performed in concert and on television throughout Britain, Europe and South America, recording on the Chandos Records, the label for whom Skaila also recorded all the major French chamber music repertoire with the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields Chamber Ensemble, as well as Mozart's Concerto for flute and harp with Susan Milan, Richard Hickox and the City of London Sinfonia.


== Session musician ==
Kanga has been active as a session musician in many other musical genres. She has worked with artists such as The Beatles, James Taylor, Pat Metheny, Chris de Burgh, Sumi Jo, James Galway, Joni Mitchell, The Mission, Cliff Richard, Elton John, Kylie Minogue, Northern Line, Girl Thing, McFly, G4, Il Divo, Duel, Zizi Possi, Michael Civisca, José Cura, Slava, Anni-Frid Lyngstad, Robbie Williams, Westlife, Samantha Mumba, and Izzy Cooper. Paul McCartney, Boyzone, Eternal, Michael Ball, Jane McDonald, Tony Banks (musician), Sarah Brightman, Björk, Misia, Pharoah Sanders, Milton Nascimento, Manic Street Preachers, Massive Attack and Sting (a solo track for the CD 20th Century Blues), Lucio Battisti


== TV credits ==
The Prince's Trust Gala, Inspector Morse, Tales Of The Unexpected, Monarch of the Glen, I Claudius, Life on Earth, Jewel of the Nile, Bleak House, Jane Eyre, Brideshead Revisited, Mayor of Casterbridge, Hollywood, Victorian Kitchen Garden, Poirot, Father Brown, Shakespeare and Hathaway, Poldark, Blue Planet, Frozen Planet, A Life on Our Planet, Earthshot, Andrew Lloyd Webber's 50th Birthday Gala Elizabeth Taylor's Birthday Concert, 16 Royal Variety Performances


== Film soundtrack credits ==
For full list see images.

Legend of Bhagat Singh, Life of David Gale, The Four Feathers, Die Another Day, The 25th Hour, Ghost Ship, Nicholas Nickleby, Cold Mountain, Troy, Shrek 2, Bridget Jones, Shark Tale, Alfie, Enduring Love, Sahara, Batman Begins, Fragile, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, The Constant Gardener, The Da Vinci Code, Harry Potter, The Mummy Returns, The Hole, Chocolat, Avengers: Endgame, Crush, The Others, Sacrifice, Possession, From Hell, Return to Neverland, Before You Go, The Time Machine, The Guru, The Shipping News, The Truth About Charlie, We Were Soldiers, Talk To Her, Ararat, Simon, 101 Dalmatians 2, Swept Away, The Hours, Les Misérables, How to Train Your Dragon 2


== Performances ==
With the Nash Ensemble (for over 25 years) including works by Ravel, Bax, Debussy, Françaix, Saint-Saëns and world premieres of Gordon Kerry's Blue Latitudes, John Tavener's A Sacred Dream and her own transcription of the Sonatine by Ravel for flute, viola and harp, first performed in 1994.
1977– 2002, 32 premieres of new works and countless series at the Wigmore Hall.
Four solo appearances at the Proms.
Appeared at the Meltdown and London Jazz Festivals with the Matrix Ensemble.
Performed Britten's Ceremony of Carols at the Barbican with Carl Davis.
Toured Germany with Sir Neville Marriner and the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields in seven performances of Debussy's Danses for solo harp and orchestra.
The Nash Inventions series at the Purcell Room in 2001, performing works by Henze, Simon Holt, Heinz Holliger, Sally Beamish and Raising Sparks by James MacMillan (recorded for Black Box Records).
In 2002, works by Holt, Anderson, Debussy and Dallapiccola.
2002 series with the London Mozart Players.


== Solo albums ==
Britten: Ceremony of Carols (Naxos, 1995).
Duos by Heifetz and Kreisler: with Xue Wei
Skaila Kanga with Emma Johnson, clarinet
Skaila Kanga with Philippa Davies, flute
Invocation: with Julian Lloyd Webber (1998)==Performs on==

Elton John: Elton John (UNI Records, 1969)
Elton John: Tumbleweed Connection (UNI Records, 1970)
Elton John: Too Low For Zero (Rocket Records, 1983)
Snell: Chamber Music for Harp – (Divine Art CD, DVT 24130, 2008)
Bax: Nonet & other chamber music. With The Nash Ensemble. (Hyperion Records CDA66807)
Arthur Bliss: Rout & Rhapsody. With The Nash Ensemble, Lionel Friend (conductor), (Hyperion Records CDA66137)
Lowell Lieberman: Flute Concertos, with James Galway and the London Mozart Players (RCA)
Passion 2: with José Carreras
David Mullikin: Oboe Concerto, with Neville Marriner and the Academy of St Martin in the Fields
Serenade Vol 2 – Tommy Reilly, Skaila Kanga
Ravel, Debussy, Saint-Saëns: Kanga, Asmf Chamber Ensemble (Chandos, 1987)
Tommy Reilly: Works for Harmonica, Harp, and String Quartet (Chandos, 1990)
Pat Metheny: Secret Story (Geffin, 1992)
Boys Air Choir: Requiem – (Victor/Roux 1997)
British folk songs: Tommy Reilly, Skaila Kanga (Chandos, 2001)
Shawn Phillips  L'Ballad Contribution A&M Records, 1970


== Criticism ==
"...the smoother sound and slower but superbly sustained Chandos performance (of the Bax Harp Quintet, by harpist Skaila Kanga and the English String Quartet on Chandos) has much more atmosphere and drama (than the Mobius, Ensemble)."
"She taught me so much about her instrument. Still humbled in her presence - as it should be!" Hans Zimmer
"Skaila is a world-class harpist and I feel honoured to have had the privilege of working with her, and to have had her stunning performances grace so many of my scores" Debbie Wiseman


== Selected Compositions ==
(Published by ALAW and included in the Lyon and Healy catalogue) See Maruka Music for full bibliography.

Les Saisons de la Harpe Suite for solo harpCadenzas for Mozart's Concerto for flute and harpBritish Folk Songs Vol. 1 and 2, For flute [violin or oboe] and harp
Miniatures 1, for harp [with optional 2nd part]
Miniatures 2, for harp and solo instrument
American Sketches for clarinet and harp (flute version available)
Conversations for tuba (cello or double bass or bassoon) and harp.
All-Time Jazz Favourites
Minstrel's Gallery - Maruka Music (a collection of 30 easy pieces for non-pedal or pedal harp)
Pathways, (a suite for solo harp in the classical style) and Harp Songbook.
Mozart's Piano Concerto K414 in A major for Solo Harp. (Transcription by Skaila Kanga)
Cadenza Notebook Vol. 1 featuring Handel's Harp Concerto in Bb, published by Lyon and Healy and Sightreading Tests for Concert and Celtic Harp (Grades 1–8) published by ABRSM.


== Collaborations ==
With Rautavaara in the editing of his new harp concerto and with Gareth Wood with his Concerto for Harp and Brass.


== Residencies ==
April 2001 - Princeton University


== Awards ==
Fellowship: Royal Academy of Music, 1994Professor of University of London 2003


== Recent activity ==
President of the Jury 2019 USA International Harp Competition.Mozart's Flute and Harp Concerto with Edward Beckett and the London Festival Orchestra.
The recorded works of Mark-Anthony Turnage.
August 2002, judge at the Lily Laskine Harp Competition in Paris.
Guest of Honour at the International Harp Competition in Bloomington, Indiana, 2004 (featuring a recital of her own compositions.)
August 2004, gave a Masterclass at the 6th European Harp Symposium in Lyon.
Toured the Baltic Capitals as a recital soloist.
Spring 2005, Skaila gave the Opening Recital of the Russian Harpists' Festival in Moscow.
2005 coast to coast lecture/recital tour of American universities.
July 2005, gave a presentation on 'The Harp in the Film and Recording Industry' at the World Harp Congress in Dublin.
Featured soloist with Richard Baker on P&O Oriana in October 2006.
Jury member of the new composition award for the 2007 USA Harp Competition in Bloomington.


== References ==


== External links ==
Website
Maruka Music
Harp masters website
Musician's gallery
Royal Academy of Music
With Julian Lloyd Webber on YouTube
Skaila Kanga at IMDb