Nabil Ayers is an American music industry entrepreneur, author and musician. In July 2019 and again in June 2020, Ayers was named one of Billboard Magazine's Indie Power Players.As a writer, Ayers has published pieces in The New York Times, NPR, Pitchfork, Rolling Stone, People, GQ, Huffington Post and The Root. His writing is often autobiographic, and touches on topics of music and race. Ayers' memoir, My Life in the Sunshine will be published by Viking Press on June 7, 2022. The book focuses on Ayers' relationship with his father, the jazz musician Roy Ayers, growing up as a mixed-race person in America, and his life in the music industry.Ayers is the current U.S. President of the UK-based Beggars Group of labels, assuming the role in early 2022 after his work for 4AD where he had served as the label's U.S. General Manager since 2009. While with 4AD, he led album campaigns for Grimes, Big Thief, St. Vincent, Purity Ring, Deerhunter, Tune-Yards, Future Islands, The Breeders, and The National, whose album Sleep Well Beast won the 2018 Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album.Ayers co-founded Seattle’s Sonic Boom Records store in 1997 with his business partner, Jason Hughes. Sonic Boom has been named one of the best record stores in America by Rolling Stone, The Wall Street Journal and SPIN Magazine, and has been profiled by NPR, The New York Times and The Seattle Times. In July 2016, it was announced that Sonic Boom Records was sold to a longtime customer.  Ayers wrote a memoir about the store that was published in Seattle newspaper, The Stranger.In 2002, Ayers founded the independent record label The Control Group where he has released music by Lykke Li, Cate Le Bon, and El Perro del Mar. In 2018, Ayers founded the independent record label Valley of Search to reissue his uncle Alan Braufman's album of the same name. The label has gone on to release music by Tomas Nordmark and Patricia Brennan. As a drummer, he has performed with various acts, most recently The Long Winters and Tommy Stinson.
He currently resides in Brooklyn, NY., where Brooklyn Magazine named Ayers #7 in a list of "The 100 Most Influential People In Brooklyn Culture.” 


== External links ==
Nabil Ayers Official Site
4AD
Valley of Search Official Site
The Control Group Official Site
Sonic Boom Records Official Site


== References ==