Barry Doyle Harris (born December 15, 1929) is an American jazz pianist, bandleader, composer, arranger, and educator. He is an exponent of the bebop style.


== Career ==

He was born in Detroit, Michigan, United States. Harris began learning the piano at the age of four. His mother, a church pianist, asked him if he was interested in playing church music or jazz. Having picked the latter, he was influenced by Thelonious Monk and Bud Powell. In his teens, he learned bebop largely by ear, imitating solos by Powell. He claimed Powell's style was the "epitome" of jazz. He performed for dances in clubs and ballrooms. He was based in Detroit through the 1950s and worked with Miles Davis, Sonny Stitt, and Thad Jones, and substituted for Junior Mance in the Gene Ammons band. In 1956, he toured briefly with Max Roach, after Richie Powell, the band's pianist and younger brother of Bud Powell, died in a car crash.Harris performed with Cannonball Adderley's quintet and on television with them. After moving to New York City, he worked as an educator and performed with Dexter Gordon, Illinois Jacquet, Yusef Lateef and Hank Mobley. Between 1965 and 1969, he worked extensively with Coleman Hawkins at the Village Vanguard.During the 1970s, Harris lived with Monk at the Weehawken, New Jersey home of the jazz patron Baroness Pannonica de Koenigswarter. He substituted for Monk in rehearsals at the New York Jazz Repertory Company in 1974.In Japan, he performed at the Yubin Chokin concert hall in Tokyo over two days, and his performances were recorded and compiled into an album released by Xanadu Records. Between 1982 and 1987, he led the Jazz Cultural Workshop on 8th Avenue in New York.Since the 1990s, Harris has collaborated with Howard Rees on videos and workbooks documenting his harmonic and improvisational systems and teaching process. He has held music workshop sessions in New York City for vocalists, students of piano and other instruments.Harris appeared in the 1989 documentary film, Thelonious Monk: Straight, No Chaser (produced by Clint Eastwood), performing duets with Tommy Flanagan. In 2000, he was profiled in the film Barry Harris - Spirit of Bebop.


== Jazz Cultural Theater ==
Larry Ridley, Barry Harris, Jim Harrison, and Frank Fuentes were partners in creating the Jazz Cultural Theater beginning 1982. Located at 368 Eighth Avenue in New York City in a storefront between 28th and 29th Streets in Manhattan, it was primarily a performance venue featuring prominent jazz artists and also hosted jam sessions. Additionally, it was known for Barry's music classes for vocalists and instrumentalists, each taught in separate sessions. Several artists recorded albums at the club, including Barry on his For the Moment. Some of the many musicians and notable jazz figures who appeared at the Jazz Cultural Theater were bassist Larry Ridley, guitarist Ted Dunbar, pianist Jack Wilson, trumpeter Bill Hardman, tenor saxophonist Junior Cook, trumpeter Tommy Turrentine, alto saxophonist Charles McPherson, pianist Mickey Tucker, guitarist Peter Leitch, tenor saxophonist Clifford Jordan, guitarist Mark Elf, alto saxophonist Lou Donaldson, drummer Leroy Williams, drummer Vernel Fournier, bassist Hal Dotson, bassist Jamil Nasser, pianist Chris Anderson, pianist Walter Davis, Jr., pianist Michael Weiss, tap dancers Lon Chaney and Jimmy Slyde, Francis Paudras (biographer of pianist Bud Powell), and the renowned jazz patroness Baroness Pannonica de Koenigswarter, who would park her silver Bentley sedan in front of the club.


== Awards and honors ==
2000 American Jazz Hall of Fame for Lifetime Achievements & Contributions to the World of Jazz
1998 Lifetime Achievements Award for Contributions to the Music World from the National Association of Negro Musicians
1998 Congratulatory Letter as a Jazz Musician and Educator by the U.S. White House
1997 Dizzy Gillespie Achievement Award
1997 Recognition of Excellence in Jazz Music and Education
1995 Doctor of Arts - Honorary Degree by Northwestern University
1995 Presidential Award, Recognition of Dedication and Commitment to the Pursuance of Artistic Excellence in Jazz Performance and Education
1995 Honorary Jazz Award by the House of Representatives
1989 NEA Jazz Master


== Discography ==


=== As leader ===
Source:


=== As sideman ===


== See also ==
Bebop scale, one of the education tools in jazz that Harris pioneered


== References ==


== External links ==
Barry Harris Official Website
Jazzworkshops Website -- publisher of Barry Harris workbooks and instructional videos
Barry Harris at AllMusic
Artist Profile: Barry Harris at WBGO
Transcription of Barry Harris Music