Mal Blum is an American songwriter, musician, writer and performer from New York. Blum has released six full-length albums, most recently Pity Boy in 2019.


== Career ==
They spent their early career promoting self-booked DIY solo tours and also self-released their early albums before signing to record labels.In 2014, they signed to punk label Don Giovanni records and announced they would be working on a new album produced by Marissa Paternoster of the band Screaming Females. After the Don Giovanni release of You Look a Lot Like Me in 2015, Blum began touring nationally as a band with a bassist and drummer, contributing to what critics called a "more developed but still gritty, punk" sound.Blum was a recurring musical and non-musical guest on The Chris Gethard Show. and has had their music featured on Logo TV's The Click List: Top 10 Videos and NewNowNext Music They have also appeared as a musical guest on the Welcome to Night Vale (WTNV) podcast and toured extensively opening for WTNV's National and International live shows in 2018 and 2019.
In February 2019 Blum released a new single, "Things Still Left To Say," and in March 2019 they toured with Lucy Dacus. That year they released the album Pity Boy,  recorded with Joe Reinhart of Hop Along at Headroom Studios in Philadelphia. Pitchfork's Abby Jones categorized Pity Boy as a shift "into potent pop-punk that recalls both Hop Along and Titus Andronicus." noting the newfound focus on guitarist Audrey Zee Whitesides' electric riffs, while maintaining the lyrics as "the album's centerpiece" writes Jones, If the electric guitar had evolved into a supporting actor by Blum’s last album, 2016’s You Look a Lot Like Me, then it’s the lead on Pity Boy. The nimble, vigorous riffs [...] ricocheting like rubber balls around “I Don’t Want To” and “Not My Job” with Blum’s vocals surging in countermelody.
Max Cohen, in her review for Bandcamp's "Album of the Day" series, writes of Pity Boy's production value:

 It’s punk in spirit, but the production is rich and warm, wrapping the power chords and solos in a sunny, welcoming fuzz. At their best, as on the jangly opener “Things Still Left to Say,” they sound like The Buzzcocks, if The Buzzcocks opted for compassion instead of bile.
In August 2020, Mal Blum was tapped to write music for Season 2 of Netflix's Trinkets television show. They wrote the song "Passenger Seat" to be used in a recurring story arc for the character Elodie.On Oct 20, 2020 Blum announced a new single to be released on Saddle Creek Records as part of the label's 7 inch series.They have contributed non-musical written work to Autostraddle, Huffington Post, and The Fader.


== Personal life ==
Blum is openly transgender and queer. They attended State University of New York at Purchase. They are Jewish. Of their songwriting style, a recent reviewer writes: Although their songs’ subject matters often touch on heavier subjects, Blum’s dry approach to otherwise difficult topics typifies Jewish humor.
Blum was diagnosed with ADHD at a young age, but has only spoken occasionally about it in interviews.


== Discography ==
Nobody Waits (2020)Nobody Waits
San Cristóbal
Pity Boy (2019)Things Still Left To Say
Not My Job
See Me
Odds
Splinter
Black Coffee
Did You Get What You Wanted
I Don't Want To
Salt Flats
Well, Fuck
Gotta Go
Maybe I'll Wait
You Look A Lot Like Me (2015)Archive
Better Go
Robert Frost
Cool Party
Split, Splitting
Reality TV
Iowa
Better Than I Was
New Orleans
The Shrink Thinks
Tempest In A Teacup (2013)Overseas Now
Side I'm On
Altitude (This Party Sucks)
The Bodies, The Zombies!
Counting My Breaths
Brooklyn
With Samson In Washington State
The Difference
Valentine's Day
Every Time You Go Somewhere (2010)San Cristóbal
Watercolors
Baltimore
New Year's Eve
Fine!
Wait Forever, Baby
Circus Heart Pt. 1
Circus Heart Pt. 2
I Got Drunk
Weary
Goodnight Sugarpop (2008)Cut it off
Dysmorphic
Country Song
Hypocrite
My Name is Earthworm
Waiting In Line
The Suburban Summer Polka
Tumbleweed
Ode to Kulele * video reached number 10 on LOGO's Video of Year for 2009
You Should Be Here
The Jugular
I have been listening


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website