Sue Fink is an American singer, songwriter, conductor, and voice teacher.


== Career ==
She is the founder and conductor of the Angel City Chorale as well as a songwriter and voice teacher. She graduated magna cum laude with a Bachelor of Fine Arts from the University of California, Los Angeles, where she studied conducting with Roger Wagner.
Fink toured internationally as a member of the Roger Wagner Chorale, and went on to establish the Oriana Renaissance Ensemble serving as conductor. In 1976, Sue Fink founded the Los Angeles Women's Community Chorus (LAWCC), serving as conductor and organizer for 10 years.
As a performing singer-songwriter, Fink released two critically acclaimed solo albums, Big Promise and True Life Adventure.  She received an achievement of excellence award from the National Association of Independent Record Distributor (NAIRD).
Under Fink's direction, the Angel City Chorale has become internationally famous for its music and call for community building through diversity.  The 170 voiced group has toured internationally and has released several CDs. One World released in late 2018 reached the number 12 spot on Billboard's world music chart.
Fink has conducted at events such as the National Democratic Convention and received a certificate of recognition from Los Angeles Mayor Garcetti. In London, she conducted the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and recorded at Abbey Road Studios.
In 2018, under her direction, the Chorale won the Golden Buzzer from Olivia Munn with the Christopher Tin song “Baba Yetu”, and reached the semi-finals on America's Got Talent.
In addition to maintaining a private voice studio in Los Angeles, she composes and arranges for choral organizations, writes for television and movie soundtracks, and writes compositions and arrangements for many choral organizations.


== Musical works ==
As a singer-songwriter, Sue Fink has released two critically acclaimed albums, one of which received an award of excellence from the National Association of Independent Record Distributors (NAIRD).  In addition, several songs that Sue wrote with songwriting partner, Paul Nelson, have been featured on television and in films including the Academy Award-winning film "The Usual Suspects," Stephen King's "Apt Pupil," as well as a number of movies for HBO, Showtime, CBS, and ABC("NYPD BLUE'" "All My Children," "Two Against Time," "The Young and the Restless").


== References ==


== External links ==
"Conductor Sue Fink", Angel City Chorale bio. Retrieved July 13, 2018.
"Sue Fink: Biography", by Laura Post, Allmusic, online at MSN.com. Retrieved Jan 21, 2010