Irina Lankova (born September 11, 1977, in Michurinsk, Russia) is an international concert pianist.


== Education ==
Born in Russia  Irina Lankova graduated with highest honours from Gnessin State Musical College in Moscow and from Royal Conservatory of Brussels with Evgeny Mogilevsky. She studied with great pianists of Russian School such as Evgeny Moguilevsky, himself a pupil of Heinrich Neuhaus, and later received personal guidance from Vladimir Ashkenazy.


== Professional career ==
Irina Lankova performs on prestigious stages all over the world such as Carnegie Hall in New York, Wigmore Hall in London, Salle Gaveau in Paris, Flagey in Brussels, Cidades das Artes in Rio and many others. She is invited to play in many international festivals: Piano Folies Touquet, Académie d'Eté de Nice, Sagra Musicale Umbria, Schiermonnikoog Kamermuziekefestival, Festival de Wallonie, Brussels Summer Festival, Fortissimo d'Orleans, Berlin Summer Festival, etc.
International critics describe Irina Lankova as a pianist with "genuinely poetic touch" and "infinite palette of colours". After her successful Wigmore Hall debut in 2008, Irina Lankova was invited to join the worldwide piano elite "Steinway Artists". She is recognised for her very personal and sensitive interpretations and recordings of Rachmaninoff, Scriabin, Schubert and Bach, for her erudite talks, and for her innovative projects such as "Piano Unveiled" and "Goldberg Visions".Her albums dedicated to Rachmaninoff, Scriabin, Chopin and Schubert are highly acclaimed by critics for their "great sensitivity" (Pianiste), "very personal narrative" (La Libre Belgique) and "compelling authority" (The Independent). In March 2021, she released her latest album "Elégie" featuring her favorite pieces by Rachmaninov, Schubert, and Bach.
Inspired by other forms of art and always in search of new ways of presenting classical music, Irina Lankova develops innovative creative projects. After many years of working on Goldberg Variations of Bach, she created in 2020 a multimedia project "Goldberg Visions" together with French visual artist Isabelle Françaix, combining music and video.
Willing to communicate more with her audience, Irina Lankova launches "Piano Unveiled" in 2016, an informal concert, enriched with her personal comments and destined to various publics. The concept meets a big success, also on the Internet in a form of short series. The artist's YouTube channel counts several million views.Since 2015, she is the artistic director of International Music Festival Max van der Linden in Belgium.


== Private life ==
Irina Lankova is married to a Belgian architect and has two children. She lives in Belgium (Walloon Brabant).


== Discography ==
Sergei Rachmaninov, Franz Liszt (2004, CD): Rachmaninov Preludes Op. 23, Liszt Rapsodie No. 2 with cadence by Rachmaninov
Alexander Scriabin (2006, CD): Sonates No. 2 & No. 9, Pieces Op. 32, Op. 57
Frédéric Chopin (2008, CD): Sonata No. 3, Ballade No. 1, Scherzo No. 2, Nocturnes
Franz Schubert (2013, CD Indésens): Drei Klavierstücke D. 946, Piano Sonata D. 959, Impromptu D. 899 No. 3
"Caprice" (2015, CD Indésens): with violinist Tatiana Samouil
"Goldberg Visions" (2020, CD): Johann Sebastian Bach Goldberg Variations
"Elégie" (2021, CD): Rachmaninov, Schubert and Bach


== External links ==
Official Website of Irina Lankova
Irina Lankova on YouTube
Irina Lankova on Facebook
Irina Lankova on Instagram


== References ==