Bryon Anthony McCane II (born September 12, 1976), better known by his stage name Bizzy Bone, A.K.A. Lil' Ripsta, is an American rapper, singer and the youngest member of the Cleveland rap group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony.


== Early life ==
Bryon Anthony McCane II was born in Columbus, Ohio to an interracial couple. In 1980, 4-year-old Bryon and his two sisters were abducted by their mother’s boyfriend while their mother was at work and held captive for over 2 years. Bryon recalls that at first, he did not know he had been kidnapped and was made to believe that his mother and grandmother were dead.
During the time he was abducted, he lived in many homes, apartments, cars, and motels, all in northern Oklahoma. He was often beaten, tortured, and sexually assaulted. In 1983, the "family" had been living on the Kaw Indian Reservation in Kaw, Oklahoma for about a year and a half. A babysitter saw his photo at the end of the made-for-TV film Adam about the producer and creator of America's Most Wanted, John Walsh's son's abduction, and called the police, resulting in his return to his family.When he was 13, Bryon began living with his oldest sister at her home near Cleveland, Ohio. During this period, he met Layzie Bone, Krayzie Bone, Wish Bone and Flesh-n-Bone. Bizzy Bone started in hip-hop as a founding member of the group Bone Enterpri$e, which was formed in 1992. The group was noticed by one of the founders of the rap group N.W.A, Eazy-E, who modified the group's name to Bone-Thugs-n-Harmony.
In 2002, McCane appeared on the FOX series America's Most Wanted (hosted by John Walsh, Adam's father)  and he revealed his abusive childhood and molestation. Bryon also wrote and performed a song, "A.M.W.", on the show in which he thanks Walsh and encourages abused children to come forward.


== Career ==
Bizzy Bone began his solo career in 1998. He is best known for his style of combining rapid-fire raps, double harmony choruses, with a soft-spoken and high-pitched delivery. His solo debut, Heaven'z Movie, was critically acclaimed and certified Gold by the RIAA.
The Gift, released on April 7, 2001, peaked at #2 on the US Billboard Independent Albums chart. Many of the songs on the album dealt with his personal life and childhood.
In 2004, Bizzy released Alpha and Omega which showed a change in his musical and lyrical content. Fans and critics responded positively to the album. Bizzy followed up with the limited-edition leaked album The Beginning and the End. Next, he released Speaking In Tongues on September 27, 2005. The title references an incident in which Bizzy Bone went on a spiritual rant during an interview on Houston radio station KPFT-FM (Party 93.3), speaking in tongues. It was met with positive reviews from critics, praising its gritty, lo-fi recording quality and Bizzy's spiritually unhinged lyricism. He released four studio albums in 2006. Two of them, The Story and Midwest Cowboy, performed well on the charts, garnering further positive reviews from music critics.
In 2008, Bizzy Bone reunited with Layzie Bone to re-form Bone Brothers and release two new studio albums, Bone Brothers III and Still Creepin' On Ah Come Up (released and credited solely as "Bone Thugs"). That year, Bizzy also  released two new solo albums. The first, an independent release Ruthless, features  guest appearances from Rick Ross and Pitbull. The other album was his major label release for After Platinum Records distributed through Virgin Records, A Song For You, which featured appearances from DMX, Joel Madden of Good Charlotte, Jim Jones, and Twista. A Song For You was heralded by music critics as Bizzy's best album in years, if not the best of his entire solo career.In 2010, Bizzy Bone was one of the ensemble of featured artists for the new re-recording of We Are The World 25 for Haiti after the country was devastated, left in ruins by a massive earthquake. The song was critically panned by music critics. The year 2010 would soon see the release of Bizzy Bone's first rap rock album titled Crossroads 2010 on Sumerian Records. The album received positive feedback from fans and critics alike.
On September 12, 2019, Bizzy released his first album in five years, Carbon Monoxide. Its title track is a direct response to the Migos for their disrespect towards Bone Thugs-N-Harmony and other artists from their era, claiming they (Migos), were the "Greatest Group of All-Time." Bizzy's fellow group member Layzie Bone publicly challenged these claims and also released a diss track towards Migos and 21 Savage after the latter came to the defense of Migos, while in the process dissing Layzie Bone calling him "old, broke" and that he could have sex with Layzie's wife. Bizzy reacted apparently intoxicated live on Instagram, threatening to kill Migos and 21 Savage for their disrespect with a double barrel shotgun, which ended abruptly with the police coming to his home in response. The video soon went viral, in the event of the gun resembling Elmer Fudd, the Looney Tunes cartoon character. This resulted in several memes, parody videos and commentary from other artists. Carbon Monoxide debuted at #3 on the iTunes album chart. He released his follow-up album "The Mantra", exactly a year later on his 44th birthday in 2020, debuting at #4 on the iTunes chart. Bizzy released his album "War of Roses" on September 12, 2021, which was on his 45th birthday, making it the third year in a row an album has been released on his birthday.


== Personal life ==
On February 1, 2020, Bryon married Jessica Nancy Cassidy also known as JCass. JCass is a singer, songwriter and model in Houston, Texas. They began dating in late 2016 and announced their engagement on November 26, 2017. Together they have one child, a son, by the name of Jesse Anthony McCane also known as JAM. He was born March 7, 2018 in Houston, Texas. The three share a YouTube channel called JAM tv, which showcases their family life and careers. Bizzy also has nine other children from previous relationships.


== See also ==
List of kidnappings
List of solved missing person cases


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
Heaven'z Movie (1998)
The Gift (2001)
Alpha and Omega (2004)
The Beginning and the End (2004)
Speaking in Tongues (2005)
The Story (2006)
Thugs Revenge (2006)
The Midwest Cowboy (2006)
Trials and Tribulations (2007)
Ruthless (2008)
A Song for You (2008)
Crossroads: 2010 (2010)
The Wonder Years (2014)
Carbon Monoxide (2019)
The Mantra (2020)
War of Roses (2021)


== Filmography ==
Cutthroat Alley (2003) .... Ghetty
Jacked Up (2001) .... Zach
Beef III DVD (2006) .... himself
What Now (2015) .... B Murda


== References ==


== External links ==
Bizzy Bone at AllMusic