Simon Fuller (born 17 May 1960) is a British entrepreneur, artist manager, film and television producer. He is the creator of the Idols television format, including the UK series Pop Idol and the US series American Idol. Fuller came to prominence in the 1990s for managing the pop group the Spice Girls. He has managed acts including David and Victoria Beckham, Annie Lennox, S Club 7, Now United, Sir Bradley Wiggins, Steven Tyler, Lewis Hamilton, Andy Murray, Amy Winehouse, Carrie Underwood, Kelly Clarkson, Will Young, Emma Bunton and Lisa Marie Presley.In 2020, Fuller signed an exclusive agreement with tech firm TikTok to create a new TikTok supergroup and concluded an agreement with Verizon Communications to develop 5G content.  In 2016, Simon Fuller persuaded Swedish quartet ABBA to re-unite to explore working in virtual reality, which led to the Abba Voyage project.In 2007, Time named Fuller one of the 100 most influential people in the world. In 2008, he was certified as the most successful British music manager of all time by Billboard. Fuller received the 2,441st star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on 23 May 2011. In 2014 he was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Brighton in his home county East Sussex in recognition for his "contribution to business, entrepreneurship and philanthropy". The 2019 Sunday Times Rich List values Fuller at £455 million.


== Biography ==
Fuller was born on 17 May 1960 in British Cyprus, where his father, a Royal Air Force pilot, had established a school, though later the family moved to Accra, Ghana where his father was the headmaster of the British Military School, Burma Camp. The family moved back to Hastings, East Sussex, where Simon's father became headmaster of the school he attended. He has two brothers, Kim and Mark.
Fuller began his career in 1981 at Chrysalis in A&R (Chrysalis Records) in the UK, where he signed Madonna's first hit 'Holiday' to the company. He started his own management company in London in 1985, 19 Entertainment, eventually selling the business to CKX, Inc. in a cash and stock deal worth over $200 million in March 2005. In 2008 the company delivered a profit of $92.5 million (£66m) into the parent company. Fuller became a director of CKX, a position which gave him creative control over all of CKX's assets including the Elvis Presley Estate, Muhammad Ali's business interests, and other rights properties, until January 2010 when he started a new firm, XIX Entertainment, while continuing to work with CKX/19 as a consultant and executive producer. XIX Entertainment was given a valuation of $100 million and is run from offices in London and Los Angeles.In February 2008, Fuller was presented with the PGA Award by the Producers Guild of America in Hollywood. At the event he was praised for his creativity, entrepreneurship, and charity work by British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and Prince Charles who also thanked Fuller for his support of the Prince's charity The Prince's Trust.


=== TV production, formats, technology ===
Fuller's first broadcast venture was Miami 7, a scripted teen TV drama starring the British pop group S Club 7 screened by BBC/Fox Kids in 100+ territories around the world. Miami 7 launched the careers of several stars including Rachel Stevens, Jon Lee, Holly Willoughby, and Ben Barnes, and the show created a blueprint for the teen-orientated television musicals that followed, including Glee and High School Musical.In 2001, Fuller created Pop Idol, a Saturday night prime time TV show on British television. The show produced instant No 1 chart hits, including for Will Young, whose single "Evergreen" was named by NME magazine in 2012 as the "biggest selling single of the century" in the UK. Fuller sold Pop Idol around the world, and he has been credited with creating the world's most valuable TV format with a value of over $8 billion made up of revenue from sponsors, merchandising, telephone, music sales, broadcast, and advertising sources. In the US, American Idol quickly became a No.1 rated show. Cowell also became a judge on the US version, and the show made stars of its presenter Ryan Seacrest as well as Cowell's co-judges Randy Jackson and Paula Abdul as well as many of its performers including Kelly Clarkson, Carrie Underwood and others. Over 30 million viewers saw David Cook win the seventh season of American Idol in May 2008 and when Fuller re-launched the show in 2011 for its 10th season ratings climbed 20% for the finale event. 122.4 million votes were cast, a record for a reality TV show.In 2005, Fuller, along with co-creator Nigel Lythgoe, launched So You Think You Can Dance on the Fox network in the US. The show grew over 16 seasons to become a regular summer hit. In 2012, Simon Fuller's XIX Entertainment created a new international format with Jennifer Lopez, Marc Anthony, and Jamie King named Q'Viva! The Chosen, and described as a celebration of Latin culture that screened in 21 territories reaching over 30 million Spanish-speaking TV viewers.In December 2016, Norwegian state broadcaster NRK announced that it had concluded a deal with Simon Fuller to produce the English language version of Skam; Fuller later announced a deal with Facebook to launch award-winning drama format SKAM Austin in the US in 2018.In 2017, international news media reported on auditions being staged by Fuller's business XIX for Now United, a real time access global pop group being cast in 14 cities around the world. In 2019, the London Evening Standard confirmed that BBC1 would broadcast Serengeti, a wildlife drama created by Fuller. In July 2020, US media reported that "Serengeti", voiced by Lupita Nyong'o, created by Simon Fuller, was nominated for a Primetime EMMY Award 


== Impact on music culture ==
Simon Fuller has been certified as the most successful British music manager of all time by Billboard magazine. He has managed the career of Annie Lennox since the release of her multi platinum album Diva in 1991. He has managed hit songwriters and producers, most notably Cathy Dennis, who first met Fuller as the singer of D Mob in the 1980s. Under Fuller's guidance, Dennis became the UK's No. 1 female songwriter with a string of hits for artists including Kylie Minogue, Britney Spears, Katy Perry, Pink, Will Young, and others.Fuller managed the Spice Girls through the peak of their 1990s success and he remains in partnership with the five girls today. Under Fuller's guidance, the Spice Girls became a marketing phenomenon, rose to chart topper status worldwide and went on to sell over 85 million records. In 2002 Fuller's company discovered 19-year-old Amy Winehouse, produced her first award-winning album and signed her to Universal Music.In 2005, 2006, and 2007, the biggest selling music acts in North America (Kelly Clarkson, Carrie Underwood, and Daughtry) were all managed by Fuller. In October 2016, Fuller announced a joint venture with the 4 original members of the Swedish supergroup ABBA to create a new digital ABBA; In August 2020, BBC News announced that Fuller had signed an exclusive agreement with tech firm TikTok to create a new TikTok supergroup.


== Expansion into fashion ==
Simon Fuller owns significant stakes in British fashion businesses Victoria Beckham Ltd and the Roland Mouret brand. In 2006 Fuller brokered the deal for 19 Entertainment to purchase a majority share in Storm Model Management.
In 2008, Fuller launched the Victoria Beckham dress collection at New York Fashion Week. Since then Victoria Beckham Limited has grown to become a best selling high-end fashion brand, stocked in 400+ outlets around the world and winning plaudits that include Brand of The Year 2012 and 2014 British Fashion Awards. In 2012 Fuller accompanied Victoria Beckham to launch the business in China.In February 2012, XIX Entertainment launched a David Beckham bodywear range in 2,500 H&M stores around the world. This was followed in 2015 when Fuller announced a joint venture with Hong Kong-based Global Brands Group Holding Ltd (787) giving Fuller and Beckham ownership of their own apparel business specifically to develop the David Beckham brand and other consumer products. The first result of this partnership was the Fall 2016 re-launch of the British heritage menswear label Kent & Curwen, which under Beckham, Fuller and 7 Global ownership currently runs 113 stores in 51 cities worldwide. In 2019, US media reported that Fuller sold 33% share of David Beckham business for $50 million after generating revenue of $72.4 million and a profit of $16 million for fiscal 2017.


== Sports activity ==
Fuller first ventured into sports management in the mid-1990s, when he negotiated the historic first post Bosman transfer of England footballer Steve McManaman to Real Madrid. In 2003, Fuller formed a joint venture partnership with David Beckham, and later masterminded Beckham's $250 million move to LA Galaxy. He remains Beckham's closest advisor.
In 2009, Fuller took on personal representation of tennis player Andy Murray, representing him during his US Open and Wimbledon wins and later helping the player to establish his own business. In March 2011, Fuller was announced as the manager of British F1 driver Lewis Hamilton and surprised many when he moved Hamilton from McLaren and signed him to a long term contract with the MercedesAMG team. Hamilton won the 2014 F1 World Championship and publicly thanked Fuller, although Hamilton did not renew his deal with Fuller's XIX Entertainment when it expired at the end of that year. In 2013 it was announced that Fuller was managing 2012 Tour De France winner Bradley Wiggins, helping him to set up his own pro-cycling team.
In 2014, Fuller and Beckham discussed plans to buy an MLS football team in Miami and later the same year Fuller was revealed as the mastermind behind Beckham's involvement in a new global whisky launch with leading British drinks company Diageo.Fuller's plan to deliver Beckham's ownership of an MLS team was announced in January 2018 when Miami was confirmed as 25th MLS team.


== Charity work ==
Fuller has championed many causes through his working life including The Prince's Trust, Amnesty International, Save the Children, United Nations Foundation, UNICEF, Greenpeace, WWF and Comic Relief. His idea for a philanthropic TV platform Idol Gives Back raised well over $185 million for US and African charities and led to Fuller being honored by UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon in 2011: "Simon Fuller is an extraordinary leader" he said. "Idol Gives Back is a tremendous initiative in giving Americans a way to save lives around the world".In 2008 Charles, Prince of Wales, thanked Fuller for his support of The Prince's Trust, stating; "He has been one of the most effective and generous ambassadors for my Trust, which I set up 32 years ago to help the most disadvantaged young people in the United Kingdom. There are many young people in the United Kingdom whose lives have been transformed and, in some cases, saved – literally – thanks to the contribution which Simon has made.". In 2009, Fuller founded Malaria No More UK in London, donating resources and funds to allow the charity to lead the fight against malaria. Fuller remains a passionate ambassador for the cause and has shared his own experience of malaria with the charity.


== Personal life ==
Fuller married his long-term girlfriend Natalie Swanston in May 2008, and they have three children.
He has a portfolio of real estate including properties in Europe, North America, and South America. In 2014, Fuller was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Brighton in recognition for his "contribution to business, entrepreneurship and philanthropy".


== Awards and nominations ==
2016 Entrepreneur of the Year Britweek Award
2016 Governor's Award Creative Arts Emmy
2014 Honorary Degree, University of Brighton
2011 Star on Hollywood Walk of Fame 
2007 Top Trend Setter, Forbes Magazine


== References ==


== External links ==
"Impresario Simon Fuller shows off talent with $75m performance", timesonline.co.uk, 4 March 2009
"The 20 most powerful celebrity makers", The Observer Magazine, 22 June 2008
Music Week "Simon Fuller tops Music Week Top 50 most influential people in UK music industry chart", musicweek.com, 15 July 2003
"The Star Maker", telegraph.co.uk, 28 September 2002
"Pop Idol scores a $1bn hit in US market", guardian.co.uk 7 September 2007