Wayne Sanders (born 29 May 1969) is a Christian worship leader and songwriter who was a music director at Cambridge Community Church, an evangelical church in central Cambridge, England. His music has sold all around the world, including in Canada, the US and Australia.


== Personal life ==
Wayne Sanders was born and raised in Durban, South Africa. He started leading worship at his church, Westville Christian Fellowship, at the age of 15 on the piano and the guitar. He went on to do a degree in Psychology and English at the University of Natal. During this degree and for a period afterwards, he was involved in setting up a multi-cultural, multi-racial gospel choir. While involved in this, Sanders was travelling around South Africa working in musical theatre and playing and singing in various bands.
Whilst at school, Sanders attained provincial colours for gymnastics. The cd cover of Free to Fly features an image of Sanders performing a backward somersault ... in his 40s.He moved to the United Kingdom in 1996, where he met his wife, Lisa, in London. A few months after arriving in London, he was invited to perform as a dancer and backing vocalist in the Ron Kenoly tour. In 2003, Sanders moved to Cambridge to take up the role of music director at Cambridge Community Church. Since then he has released three albums, one of which was with Elevation Records. In 2008, he was approached to head a community gospel choir as part of the Hope 08 initiative. This choir has performed at various events around Cambridge, including the "Big Weekend", and has members from churches of different denominations in the area.
In 2011, Sanders returned to South Africa to assist in a church plant. He currently resides in Wales.


== Recording career ==
In 2004, Sanders recorded his debut album, Giver of Life, at West Wing Studios, Cambridge. This was released independently in early 2005. Elevation Music signed Sanders to release his second album, Free To Fly, in 2007. His latest release was in 2009, an EP entitled There's A Light, which was again recorded at West Wing Studios in Cambridge. This was released under the artist name C3 (which stands for Cambridge Community Church).
Whilst in South Africa, Wayne assisted Westville Christian Fellowship with the recording of I Long to Draw Near (1998). On the album, he features as a songwriter, keyboardist, choir master and musical arrangements.  He returned to South Africa in 2000 to record and perform on Simunye 2000 - Celebration of the Nations (2000) as a songwriter and singer.


== Discography ==
Giver of Life (2005, independent release)
Free To Fly (2007, Elevation Records)


=== With Cambridge Community Church ===
There's A Light (2009, independent release) With Westville Christian Fellowship
I Long to Draw Near ( 1998, phulon records)


== References ==


== External links ==
Wayne Sanders Official Site
Cambridge Community Church Official Site
Cross Rhythms article on Wayne Sanders