Nicholas Anthony Martin is an American musician. He is known as the current rhythm guitarist for the rock band Sleeping with Sirens and the former member of the band Underminded. Previously he was a guitarist for the band Cinematic Sunrise. Martin has also pursued guitar for the short-lived post-hardcore supergroups Isles & Glaciers and D.R.U.G.S.


== Biography ==
Martin began playing guitar when he was 10 years old and was raised on an eclectic spectrum of music by his father. He was greatly inspired by Queen & The Beatles at a young age. Nick started his first band (Diaper Rash) in the 8th grade after being inspired by local bands at the time like Blink-182, Swindle,
& Carter Peace Mission. In 1999, Martin formed the rock band Underminded. They were originally a pop punk band, which eventually molded into a hardcore punk and post-hardcore band with an outrageous view on other bands. Underminded self-released their first EP, The Task of the Modern Educator, in 2003, subsequently signing to Kung Fu Records in 2004, releasing the album "Hail Unamerican". Underminded was voted Best Hard Rock band of the year 2005 by the San Diego Music Awards. In 2007, they signed with Uprising Records and released Eleven:Eleven. Since then, Martin has written, recorded, and toured with Chiodos, Cinematic Sunrise, Isles & Glaciers, and Craig Owens.
Martin has filled in for other musicians in bands including Slick Shoes (bass) and Norma Jean (vocals). He appeared on Atreyu's fourth album, Lead Sails Paper Anchor and Chiodos's second album, Bone Palace Ballet.
Martin is co-owner of the management company Citadel Artists who manages Underminded and Misdelphia.
Martin helped form the post-hardcore supergroup D.R.U.G.S. in late 2010 and released one studio album, Destroy Rebuild Until God Shows, in 2011. They disbanded in August 2012.After the departure of Sleeping with Sirens rhythm guitarist Jesse Lawson in 2013, Martin became Lawson's replacement on both rhythm guitar and backing vocals. Martin subsequently became a permanent member in 2014.


== Personal life ==
He is the cousin to Vic and Mike Fuentes of the band Pierce the Veil. Martin has said that his mother is a cancer survivor, he's an only child, and he loves sushi. In 2016, he married Jenna Martin (née Silva).


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website