William Frederick Burr (born June 10, 1968) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, writer and podcaster. He created and starred in the Netflix animated sitcom F Is for Family (2015–2021) as the main character, Frank Murphy. Also, he played Patrick Kuby in the AMC crime drama series Breaking Bad (2008–2013), and played Migs Mayfeld in the Star Wars television series The Mandalorian (2019–present). He co-founded the All Things Comedy network and has hosted the twice-weekly comedy podcast, titled Monday Morning Podcast, since May 2007. His stand-up comedy special, Paper Tiger, received a nomination for Best Comedy Album at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards.


== Early life ==
William Frederick Burr was born on June 10, 1968, in Canton, Massachusetts, the son of nurse Linda Ann (née Wigent) and dentist Robert Edmund Burr. He is one of five brothers and is of German and Irish heritage. He graduated from high school in 1987.
In 1993, he obtained a bachelor's degree in radio from Emerson College in Boston, Massachusetts. In college, one of his professors was writer David Foster Wallace. He worked in warehouses before starting his comedy career, later stating that he enjoyed the freedom of the job: "If my boss gave me a rough time, I could just get on a forklift and just, like, drive away."


== Career ==
Burr's comedy career began in 1992. He moved to New York City in 1994. Since May 2007, Burr has recorded a weekly one-hour podcast, Bill Burr's Monday Morning Podcast, in which he speaks about his experiences, current events, going on tour, and sports, and offers advice to questions submitted by the listeners. The podcast is available on Burr's website, YouTube channel and on the All Things Comedy network. He is sometimes joined by his wife Nia and has featured guests and interviews with other comedians. Burr premiered a new podcast co-hosted with fellow comedian  Bert Kreischer, called the Bill Bert Podcast, in October 2019.
Burr also appears as a guest on radio shows and other comedians' podcasts, such as Opie and Anthony, You Made It Weird with Pete Holmes, The Adam Carolla Show, The Joe Rogan Experience, WTF with Marc Maron, The Nerdist Podcast, The Adam Buxton Podcast, and Nobody Likes Onions. Burr was also the first guest on Tom Green's podcast. On April 18, 2011, he guest hosted the Hollywood Babble-On podcast alongside Ralph Garman.

Burr has sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden on November 14, 2015, the Royal Albert Hall on June 6, 2018 and consecutive shows on March 4 and 5, 2019. Burr holds the record for the most consecutive sold-out shows at the Wilbur Theatre, where he performed 19 sold-out shows in a row, besting the record of 10 set by Aziz Ansari. Burr sold out 20,000 seats at the Los Angeles Forum on September 28, 2018.In 2008's Grand Theft Auto IV, Burr voices Jason Michaels of the biker gang The Lost MC in the mission "No Love Lost". In 2009, he reprised his role in the game's expansion pack The Lost and Damned.
Burr's first hour-long special, Why Do I Do This? (2008), was filmed in New York. Burr's special Let it Go was recorded at The Fillmore in San Francisco and premiered on Comedy Central on September 18, 2010. A later special, You People Are All the Same, premiered in 2012 as a Netflix exclusive. In 2014, Burr filmed his fourth hour-long special I'm Sorry You Feel That Way at the Tabernacle Theater in Atlanta, Georgia. Unusual for modern comedy specials, the film was shot in black and white. He was also a regular on Chappelle's Show.
Burr has been referred to as a "comedian's comedian" by observers of the American stand-up comedy circuit. Burr appeared in the movie Date Night as Detective Walsh. He has also appeared in the fourth and fifth seasons of AMC's Breaking Bad as Patrick Kuby. He played Mark Mullins in the 2013 buddy cop film The Heat.
Burr voices lead character Frank Murphy in F Is for Family, which premiered on Netflix on December 18, 2015. The show, an animated sitcom, draws on Burr's stand-up and the absurdity of political correctness. Season 4 of the animated series debuted on Netflix on June 12, 2020. Burr writes and executive produces the series along with Michael Price. Burr's fifth hour-long special, Bill Burr: Walk Your Way Out, debuted on Netflix on January 31, 2017. He appeared in the third episode (titled "Bill Burr") of the second season of the HBO series Crashing.Burr's sixth hour-long special, Bill Burr: Paper Tiger, debuted on Netflix on September 10, 2019. In December 2019, he portrayed the character Migs Mayfeld in the sixth and fifteenth episodes of the Disney+ series The Mandalorian.
On October 10, 2020, Burr hosted NBC's Saturday Night Live for the first time.Bill Burr's You People Are All the Same was the first stand up special to premier exclusively on Netflix and F Is for Family the first Original Netflix Animated Series.


== Style ==
Rolling Stone magazine called Burr "the undisputed heavyweight champ of rage-fueled humor". Burr often portrays himself as "that loud guy in the bar" with "uninformed logic". In an interview with The Boston Globe, Burr stated, "I'm the 'dude, bro' guy." According to the Montreal Gazette, Burr is "a cynic and a contrarian who has never paid any heed to political correctness". The New York Times in 2013 called Burr "one of the funniest, most distinctive voices in the country for years".Burr cites Richard Pryor, George Carlin, Bill Cosby, Sam Kinison and Patrice O'Neal as the five greatest stand-up comedians of all time.


== Politics ==
Burr voted for Green Party candidate Ralph Nader in the 2000 United States presidential election. In an interview with Forbes, he said political correctness does not address the problems it is aimed at fixing – such as racism – since it only addresses vocabulary rather than changing the attitudes that people have. He said it has no answer for or impact on other major socio-political issues, like those about banks and pharmaceutical companies.


== Personal life ==
Burr married actress Nia Renee Hill in 2013. Their daughter was born on January 20, 2017. Their son was born in June 2020. They reside in Los Angeles. Hill sometimes appears as a guest on his podcast.Burr is a licensed helicopter pilot. In his spare time, he plays drums. He enjoys heavy metal music and is a fan of Metallica, AC/DC, Led Zeppelin, Pantera, Ministry, Slayer, Iron Maiden, and Meshuggah. He cited drummers John Bonham and Dave Lombardo as inspirations for taking up drumming, and enjoys smoking cigars.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Podcast ===


=== Video games ===


== Comedy albums and specials ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Quotations related to Bill Burr at Wikiquote
 Media related to Bill Burr at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
Bill Burr at IMDb
Bill Burr Saturday Night Live Opening Monologue, October 10, 2020 on YouTube