Jon Baker (born 1960) is a music industry executive. He has worked as a fashion designer, promoter, and is currently co-owner of Geejam, a luxury resort and recording studio located in San San, near Port Antonio, Jamaica.


== Early life ==
Born in 1960 in London, | Baker’s mother was a British fashion designer and his father sold classic cars. Baker attended the Chelsea College of Art. In 1983, Baker designed and promoted a club on Union Square called Fresh 14, before it closed after a short while and in 1984, Baker returned to the UK.


== Early Career ==
After leaving school in 1977, Baker opened a punk t-shirt store called Blooze in Kensington Market in 1978. In 1979, operations grew and Blooze was relocated to the Great Gear Market, Kings Road, London and renamed Axiom. In 1980 Baker moved to New York and in 1981 staged a combined Axiom fashion show and concert in support of Spandau Ballet’s performance at The Underground, Broadway’s disco club.In 1982, Baker launched UK fashion label Demob in New York. Baker then based himself in New York where he met club promoter and manager Ruza Blue who introduced him to the hip-hop scene in the Bronx. Baker then began working at The Roxy club.Baker produced fashion shows for various designers and events in New York, such as the Danceteria and the Peppermint Lounge. 1983, Baker designed and promoted a club on Union Square called Fresh 14, before it closed after a short while and in 1984 Baker returned to the UK.


== Gee Street Records, 1985–90 ==
Baker returned to London in 1984. In 1985, Baker organized Doug E. Fresh and Slick Rick's first UK tour. That year, he met Rob Birch and Nick Hallam of the Stereo MCs and together they began to produce and distribute white label records to London dance shops. He also met his future wife Ziggi Golding, an agent who ran the progressive "Z" modeling agency, with whom he established Gee Street Records. Among the artists, Gee Street signed and/or promoted were Jon King/King Butcher, Funtopia, Gail Ann Dorsey, Queen Latifah, Jungle Brothers, the Stereo MCs, and P.M. Dawn.
Gee Street's first major success was the release of Straight out the Jungle by Jungle Brothers; their single "I'll House You" went top 5 in the UK national charts. Then, in 1988, he signed the Stereo MCs to a licensing deal with Island Records. In 1989, he  brought P.M. Dawn to England.


== Island Records 1991–97 / V2 1997–2000 ==
In 1990, Chris Blackwell signed P.M. Dawn, and proposed a joint venture with Island/PolyGram that secured Gee Street's roster for Island.  Back in the US, Baker became a senior A&R man on the Island Records team and head of Blackwell's newly formed Island Jamaica label for North America, which included Luciano, Chaka Demus and Pliars, and Beenie Man, among others. In 1996, Blackwell left Island and the Polygram group. With this, Baker bought Gee Street and resold 75% of it to Richard Branson.  In the deal, Baker retained control of Gee Street's marketing, promotion and A&R, while Branson made Gee Street the cornerstone of V2 Records in North America and named Baker co-president.


== Geejam, 2000s ==
Baker sold his shares of Gee Street to Richard Branson in 2000. In 2002, he moved to Jamaica, became a Jamaican citizen.  That year, he also produced the album Adelante, featuring Ky-Mani Marley and Alberto D'Ascola (aka Alborosie)In 2004, Baker produced Two Culture Clash in collaboration with producer Mark Jones in the UK. In 2004 and again in 2005, he became a consultant for New Reality TV's Digicel Rising Stars talent competition on Jamaica's TVJ television station in 2004.In 2006, Baker worked with Steve Beaver of the Hong Kong-based Beaver Music on the Singerz Collection album series through Universal Music Japan; it featured contemporary songs interpreted in a reggae style. Later that year, however, Baker and Beaver went into a more formal partnership and agreed to develop Geejam into a luxury private hotel. To this point, Baker had devoted a great deal of his energy to make Geejam an exclusive residential recording studio. The studio's resources had earned a strong reputation among industry insiders and attracted several top artists including Gorillaz, No Doubt, India Arie, Dru Hill, Gondwana, Les Nubians, Wyclef Jean, and Björk.Geejam opened to the general public in 2008 and is part of the Island Outpost brand. Since 2008, Geejam has been rated Jamaica's number-one hotel by travel review website TripAdvisor.com in March 2010.  Over this time, Drake, Santigold, Major Lazer, and Amy Winehouse have all worked on recording projects there. The Geejam Group's most recent project involved the Jamaican mento band The Jolly Boys. Their album Great Expectation was released in the UK on 13 September 2010, and was received well by critics in Europe.


== References ==