Victoria Jordanova, née Viktorija (Vita) Pop Jordanova, was born in the former Yugoslavia in 1952. She is a composer, performer, and media artist.  She is the creative director, curator, producer and the sound editor for ArpaViva, a music and performance label she founded in 2003.


== Career ==
As a composer, virtuoso harpist, and pianist, Victoria Jordanova melds experimental techniques, electronics and improvisation with her classical music education.  Recordings of her music were published by Composer's Recordings Inc., Innova, and ArpaViva labels. Jordanova wrote music for ensembles such as The California EAR Unit,  Zeitgeist, Bang On The Can All Stars, Creative Voices, and CurvedAir.  Her music was included in the 1994 "The Composer-Performer 40 Years of Discovery",  Composer's Recordings Inc. 40th Anniversary Anthology of American Music. Her solo CD,  "Requiem for Bosnia and Other Works",  was selected as one of the 10 best classical recordings of the year by Tim Page in New York NewsDay in 1994.With ArpaViva Victoria Jordanova published first ever recording of John Cage's "Postcard From Heaven" for 1-20 harps in 2007. Harp parts were played by Jordanova herself while Cage's ossia vocal part was performed by Pamela Z.  ArpaViva releases also include the DVD "Panopticon", a film based on a live performance by Victoria Jordanova and California EAR Unit held at the Bing Theater (Los Angeles County Museum of Art) on November 25, 2002. "Panopticon" is an interdisciplinary piece exploring "surveillance society", and performers include California EAR Unit, Victoria Jordanova, and Jeffery Atik. This performance was directed by Relja Penezic and released in 2003, distributed by Cinema Guild of New York. The 2007 CD, "In a Landscape", focused on music for electric and amplified harp, and the 2010 album "New York Love Songs", named after a song cycle Jordanova wrote in 1997 in New York City, also includes pieces by Charles Ives, John Cage, Frederic Rzewski, and Ashley Wang, performed by Jenny Q. Chai.


== Education ==
Victoria Jordanova holds a B.A. from Michigan State University. After graduating from Michigan State University, she was awarded the French government fellowship for special graduate studies in Paris. While in Paris, she was an Artist-in-Residence at the Cité International des Arts. Following her studies in Paris, Jordanova studied at the Moscow Conservatory and then returned to the United States with a Langley Fellowship at New York University where she completed an M.A. in Musicology.


== Personal life ==
Today, Victoria Jordanova lives and works in Los Angeles, California.


== Archival Collections ==
A collection of Jordanova's donated materials is housed at the George Mason University Special Collections Research Center.


== References ==


== External links ==
Victoria Jordanova's website
ArpaViva Foundation Inc.
Panopticon
Jordanova on "Requiem for Bosnia"
"Outer Circles" Album
"Dance to Sleep" Album