Peter Musson (born 1940) was a principal Bassoonist in the Queensland Symphony Orchestra and Senior Lecturer in Bassoon at the Queensland Conservatorium and is a soloist and member of chamber music ensembles.


== Background ==
Musson was born in Auckland, New Zealand in 1940 and was educated at St Peter's College. In 1956, he auditioned for a position with the NZBC orchestra under James Robertson, the resident conductor of the orchestra, (who had instituted a policy of regular auditioning and reauditioning). Musson was appointed and, at the age of 16, became the youngest ever member of the NZBC Symphony Orchestra


== Professional career ==
Musson remained with the NZBC Symphony Orchestra for twelve years (June 1956-March 1967), becoming Principal Bassoonist and also a member of the New Zealand Wind Quintet. In 1967 he left New Zealand in order to broaden his musical experience and travelled widely. After two years as a free-lance player in London he was appointed to Principal Bassoon positions with in turn, the Ulster Orchestra in Belfast, the Durban Symphony Orchestra in South Africa, the Niederrhein Sinfoniker in Germany and the Queensland Symphony Orchestra in Brisbane. Musson also appeared as Guest Principal with such orchestras as London's Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the Gurzenich Orchestra of Cologne, the Australian Chamber Orchestra, the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra. He has also performed widely as a soloist and as a member of chamber music ensembles.


== Teaching ==
Musson has also had a very successful teaching career with former students having held professional playing and teaching positions on four continents. He has been on staff at the Belfast School of Music, the Krefeld Musikschule and the Queensland Conservatorium where he was Senior Lecturer in Bassoon and Chamber Music until 2002.


== Discography ==
"From Fire by Fire" Queensland Wind Soloists 4MBS 1990
"William Hurlstone Chamber Music" Continuum 2001


== Notes ==