Ion Ivanovici (Serbian Cyrillic: Јован Ивановић) (alternatively: Jovan Ivanović, Iosif Ivanovici, Josef Ivanovich) (1845 – 28 September [O.S. 16 September] 1902) was a Romanian military band conductor and composer of Banat Serbian origin, best remembered today for his waltz Waves of the Danube.
Ivanovici was born in Timișoara, Austrian Empire.  His interest in music began after he learned to play a flute given to him when he was a child.
Ivanovici moved to and lived most of his life in Kingdom of Romania, Galați. Reaching the rank of officer in the Romanian army, his interest in military music culminates during his appointment as general inspector of military songs in 1900. In 1901 he settled in Bucharest where he died a year later.
Although today Ivanovici is chiefly remembered for his waltz "Waves of the Danube" ("Donauwellen" in German, "Flots du Danube", in French), in his lifetime he composed over 300 works (many of them lost today). 
Other notable compositions are Carol I March, dedicated to King Carol of Romania, "Carmen Sylva" waltz, dedicated to Queen Elisabeth of Romania, and "Romanian heart" waltz op 51 ("Inimă română" in Romanian , "Cordialité roumaine" in French).
His works were published by over sixty publishing houses throughout the world. In 1889, Ivanovici won the coveted march prize to mark the World Exhibition in Paris, out of 116 entries.While some may dispute his nationality today, he is by all historical standards a Romanian composer of Serbian origin.
His great-grandson Andrei Ivanovitch is a successful international classical pianist.


== Compositions ==
Souvenir Moskau (Souvenir from Moscow) Waltz
Erzherzog Carl Ludwig March, Op. 129
La Serenade
The Daughter of the Boatman, or Schiffers Tochterlein (La Fille du Marin)
Seufzer Waltz (Sigh Waltz)
Sinaia Waltz
Szerenade Zigeuneren (Gypsy Serenade)
Carmen Sylva Waltz from 1892
Mariana Polka
Romania's Heart Waltz, Op. 51
Incognito Waltz
Abschied von Focșani March (Farewell to Focsani March)
Vision de l'Orient Waltz (Vision of the East), Op. 147
Meteor Waltz
Im Mondenglanz Waltz (Moonglow Waltz), Op. 122
Magic of the Mountains Waltz
Liebes Klange Polka (Love of Music Polka)
Storm Galopp
Wild Flowers Waltz
Abendtraume Polka-Mazurka (Evening Dream Polka-Mazurka)
Agatha Waltz
Der Liebesbote Waltz (Messenger of Love Waltz), Op. 136
Easy, like a Dream, also known as Legere, comme un reve in French and Leicht, wie der Traum in German
Poker Polka, Op. 123
Am Hofe der Czarin Waltz (In the Courts of the Princess Waltz), Op. 124
Die Ballkönigin Waltz (King of the Ball Waltz), Op. 127
Goldene Stunden Waltz (Golden Hours Waltz), Op. 128 from 1893
Céline Polka-Mazurka, Op. 130
Natalia Waltz, Op. 134
Beim Pfanderspiel Polka, Op. 137
Bluthenzauber Waltz, Op. 149
Lieb' um Liebe Waltz (Love for Love Waltz), Op. 155
Alina Waltz
Amalia Waltz
Life in Cyprus
Souvenir de Brăila Quadrille
Aurel Waltz
Cleopatra Waltz
Elena Polka-Mazurka
Farmecul Peleșului
Fata pescarului
Frumoasa româncă Waltz
Frumoșii ochi albaștri Song (The Beautiful Blue Eyes)
Hora micilor dorobanți
Herzliebchen Waltz
Kalinderu March
La balul curții Mazurka (The Mazurka of the Court's Ball)
Luceafărul Waltz ("Luceafăr" is the popular name of the Venus star in Romanian)
Military March
Marșul Carol
L'Odalisque Polka-Mazurka
Pe Dunăre Mazurka (On the Danube Mazurka)
Plăcerea balului Mazurka (The Pleasure of the Ball Mazurka)
Porumbeii albi (The White Doves)
Die Konigin des Morgens or The Queen of the Morning
Rosina Polka from 1902
Sârba moților ("Sârba" is a traditional dance, "moți" are peasants of Maramureș region)
Suvenire Quadrille
Maus Polka or Mouse Polka
Tatiana Waltz
Roses from the Orient Waltz
Viața la București Waltz (Life in Bucharest Waltz)
Visuri de aur Waltz (Golden Dreams Waltz)
Zâna Dunării (The Fairy of The Danube)
Anniversary Waltz
Bavarian Ländler
Kaiserreise or Voyage Imperial March
La Bella Roumaine Waltz from 1901
Danube Waves


== References ==


== External links ==
The Johann Strauss Society of Great Britain: Iosef Ivanovici
Free scores by Ion Ivanovici at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)