Brian Hardgroove is a producer and bass player for Public Enemy (band).He grew up in Hollis, Queens.Hardgroove is on hiatus as the bass player for Public Enemy. He has also toured with Bootsy Collins and T.M. Stevens in a three-bass player tour.


== Current projects ==
Hardgroove works as a producer and educator. As of 2015, he is the artist in residence at Santa Fe University of Art and Design, where he helped start the Artists for Positive Social Change program. As a music producer, Hardgroove cites Eddie Kramer (Jimi Hendrix, Led Zeppelin, Kiss) and Jack Douglas (Aerosmith, John Lennon, Cheap Trick) as two of his closest and most trusted advisers in the music business. He worked as a producer for Demerit and Brain Failure. He is also the founder of From a Whisper to a Dream, a program that helps young musicians obtain endorsements from manufacturers of musical equipment.His most recent project is "Audio Rhythm Theory" with Police drummer Stewart Copeland, along with Grammy-winning guitarist Larry Mitchell, who were on a world-wide search for vocalists for their new recording project Audio Rhythm Theory (A.R.T.), touted as the "Biggest Audition in the World," looking for vocalists who can sing and/or rap in English as well as their native languages. Hardgroove is also currently in production with Fred Schneider (The B52s) completing the debut album for GOOD THANG. Schneider and Hardgroove compose all the songs together. Hardgroove plays all the instruments while Schneider provides his classic vocals stylings.
In November 2015, Hardgroove joined Harmony Central to create a Signature Forum called "Hardgroove (and Nothing Less)." The aim of the forum is to provide access to the huge reservoir of expertise Brian has accumulated from his years of touring, recording, playing, and producing.


== References ==
O'Keefe, Phil. "From A Whisper To A Dream". Harmony Central. Harmony Central. Retrieved 25 November 2015.


== External links ==
Brian Hardgroove Interview NAMM Oral History Library (2017)