Fiora (full name Fiora Cutler, also known as Amy Cutler, born 21 June 1979) is an Australian musician, singer-songwriter, record producer and composer born in Tasmania, Australia, and based in Berlin.


== Education ==
Classically trained in singing and violin, Fiora won a scholarship to the Queensland Conservatorium Griffith University to study voice completing a bachelor's degree in music performance with Professor Janet Delpratt graduating in 2001.


== Early career ==
Fiora made her professional debut in opera with Opera Queensland, and as soloist with orchestra performing Handel's Messiah with the Queensland Orchestra in 2001. With a preference for chamber works and lieder, she performed most often in recital with her longtime friend, pianist and composer Paul Hankinson. Increasingly frustrated with the world of classical music Fiora began writing her own music in 2002. Together with Hankinson, she began setting the texts of Australian poet Judith Wright. In 2003, the pair released the classical album Art Songs, which included an original setting of "The Watcher".
Fiora slowly turned her attention to writing music. After working on various soundtracks for TV and documentary film, she began moving into songwriting and dance music.


== Songwriting and singing ==
Whilst living in London in 2006, Fiora co-wrote the song "Broken Pieces" with Guy Sigsworth and Eicca Toppinen for the band Apocalyptica (see 7th Symphony (album)) During this period she also wrote the strings for Alanis Morissette's release Flavours of Entanglement.
In 2009, Fiora travelled to Berlin to work with Paul Hankinson as finalists in the international song competition Das Lied. Following the competition and the coinciding success of a dance topline she had written and performed in 2007, "Show me a Reason", Fiora began collaborating with producers in Europe leading to releases with Armin van Buuren ("Breathe in Deep" from the album Mirage in 2010, and "Waiting for the Night" from the album Intense in 2013) and Moguai as well as various releases for other pop artists.
She has worked with Jaxon Bellina, Moguai, The King of Sweden, Robot Koch, Robert Miles, Rainer Rütsch, Famties, Markus Binapfl & Erick Morillo, Seven Lions, Audiofly and DJT from Get Physical, Paul Nza, and Jason Ross.In 2013 Fiora co-operated with Armin van Buuren on the track "Waiting for the Night" released on the album Intense. She also sang the song "Illegal" for the Michael Mind Project, which was part of their album State of Mind.


== Orchestral writing ==
Whilst living in Tasmania in 2005, Fiora wrote the beginnings of what would be her first major orchestral project Flyphoenixx, which was recorded in the Federation Concert Hall in Hobart in June 2005 with the first session conducted by Guy Noble. After putting the project on hold for a number of years Fiora came back to the project in 2009, recording new works she conducted herself. She has stated on her website she hopes to release Flyphoenixx mid-2011.
Fiora will score her first major feature film—Matt Norman's Scab Girl Asylum—in March 2011.


== References ==


== External links ==
das-lied.com
fioramusic.com
scabgirlasylum.com