Ardit Gjebrea (born 7 June 1963) is an Albanian singer-songwriter, producer, and television presenter.


== Life and career ==
Gjebrea began singing at the age of five in Albanian children festivals, and is known for songs like "I ëmbël zëri i gjyshës", "Kur kendoj per ty moj nënë" and "Ballë për pionierin dëshmor". On 17 December 1991, he made a breakthrough in his career, winning the Festivali i Këngës në RTSH prize with the song "Jon". In 1995, he won the same prize with his song "Eja".
Ardit Gjebrea has released three albums throughout his career, beginning with the eponymous "Ardit Gjebrea" in 1992. In 1997 he launched "Projekt Jon", the best-selling album in Albania. "Projekt Jon" showcased Gjebrea's artistic range as he merged influences of Albanian traditional music, Balkanic and Mediterranean sounds and instruments as well as recent trends in international music. In 2004 he released "Ja ku jam", an album mostly covered in Gjebrea's musical translations of inner wandering, sentimental and melancholic moods, and rock&pop hits.
While no official data exists, Ardit Gjebrea is allegedly the highest selling singer in Albania. As a singer-songwriter he has held some 250 concerts in Albania, as well as memorable performances in USA, Canada, Germany, United Kingdom, Greece, Romania, Turkey, Italy, Belgium and China.
Ardit’s daughter, Anna Gjebrea, represented Albania in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2021.


=== Career as a presenter and producer ===
During his career, he has presented and produced several TV shows including the famous TeleBingo, several editions of the yearly Miss & Mister Albania, Dua më shumë Shqipërinë, Rokoloko, Krishtlindje në Tiranë, etc. In 1996 he was host of the Miss Europe Contest, held that year in Albania. In 2007 Gjebrea hosted the 19th edition of the 'Miss Model of the World' contest held in China.


=== Kënga Magjike ===
Every year, in a process starting in June and ending in November, Ardit Gjebrea, through his production house JonMusic and in cooperation with KLAN Television produces and finalizes Kënga Magjike, a festival of the contemporary music for artists from Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia and Montenegro. The first Kenga Magjike was held in 1999, and the last edition took place in November 2016. Kenga Magjike is broadcast live in Albania by Klan TV, Ora News and STV, in Kosovo by RTV21, in Macedonia by Alsat and across the Balkans by the Bulgarian network Ballkanika Music Television.


=== E Diela Shqiptare ===
Since 2008, Ardit Gjebrea is the producer and host of E Diela Shqiptare (Albanian Sunday), a Sunday afternoon show that has become the favourite program of the weekend for Albanians. E Diela Shqiptare includes debates, ballet, live music, performances, guests, sport results, games, etc. E Diela Shqiptare is broadcast live on Klan TV from 14.00 pm – 19.30 pm.
“The Albanian Sunday", the most popular programme for all the Albanian families, every Sunday afternoon. The most ambitious television project that captures the most expansive airtime in the history of Albanian television, a gigantic structure which demands a staff almost as big as a small-level TV channel.  "The Albanian Sunday" is a program that encompasses a marathon airtime of 6 hours of live transmission. Ardit Gjebrea on TV Klan presents a TV spectacle that is breaking and setting new records of audience and duration.
Structure:
The show starts with Pro & Kunder -, with four VIP guests debating pros & cons of different topics of sociology, philosophy, economy, art, culture, as well as input from the in-studio public or callers from homes.
VIP in the Kitchen – the four VIP guests, having concluded the debate, pass on into a live cooking contest. Offering a new side of their character and personality, politicians, singers, sportsmen, actors and other VIP of the Albanian society cook different recipes in the studio of the Albanian Sunday.
Music – the best singers from Albania and Kosovo perform live, accompanied by the orchestra of maestro Shpëtim Saraçi.
Albanian Telebingo – a weekly national lottery, with live in-studio draws and surprise calls to viewers offering prizes.
Ballet – performances from the ballet troupe of choreographer Albi Nako.
The Interview – The most important and interesting individuals in Albania appear live in the studio of ‘The Albanian Sunday” in a face-to-face interview with host Ardit Gjebrea.
The Sunday Couple – A 2-month competition between 10 couples, who undergo a very interesting competitive process, which shall be concluded with the winner gaining a brand new apartment in the Albanian seaside. The public present in the show votes for the most favorite couple, thus deciding on the winner. Couples undergo several tests and games, displaying their character, charisma, humor and values of their relationship. Parents, grandparents, young couples and even just-married ones have been part of this competition.  Apart from questions that try to display how well couples know each other, they also undergo artistic tests, or quizzes and games.
Shihemi në Gjyq – An [arbitration based court show|Court_show#Arbitration-based_reality_court_show], where arbitrator Eni Çobani helps citizens solve conflicts, often regarding property rights. The segment is known for its audience participation, where the audience votes on the issue, and also for the fights that often break out over small issues.


== Awards and nominations ==
Festivali i Këngës

Kult Awards

Videofest

Zhurma Show Awards


== See also ==
Festivali i Këngës në RTSH
Kënga Magjike


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ardit Gjebrea at IMDb
http://www.arditgjebrea.info/