Fatemeh Solati (Persian: فاطمه صولتی), better known by her stage name Shohreh (Persian: شهره), is an Iranian singer. Since the Islamic Revolution in Iran, she has continued her music career in exile.


== Biography ==
Shohreh Solati born on January 4, 1959, in Tehran to a well-to-do family of artists and entertainers, Shohreh developed an interest in music early on – singing at seven years of age. She later went on to study at the Tehran Conservatory of Music, where she received training in singing and the clarinet. Her first album titled Dokhtar-e-Mashreghi (Persian for "Eastern Girl") was successful, garnering some notability.  Magazines directed toward the youth of Iran in the 1970s also gave exposure to the singer.
Shortly before the Revolution in 1979, Shohreh left Iran to perform in a series of concerts in the United States and, due to restrictions imposed on entertainers by the new leadership, she was not able to return. So for the time being, she decided to settle down in New York City, where she married soon after. Since the revolution came unexpectedly, she and other exiled Iranian singers initially faced some difficulties to re-establish the community. However, after the birth of her daughter, Shohreh became more involved in her professional career.
Leaving behind New York City, Shohreh moved to Los Angeles in 1982, settling with the exiled Iranian music industry of the 1970s, who also established in that city. Working with songwriters, composers and arrangers, she produced and released several new albums. Most of these albums were nostalgic of the golden years of Iranian life just a few years before and thus appealed to a much wider audience, giving Shohreh's fame momentum. The yearning for Iran in Shohreh's music established a strong solidarity amongst the struggling Iranians who found comfort in her songs.
Her notable albums during this period include Jaan Jaan, Salam, Sedaayeh Paa and Shenidam.  Throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, Solati managed to increase her appeal by the release of newer albums, each earning commendation. In the 1980s she had many concerts with Siavash Shams and Andy Madadian.
However, it was not until the release of the album Zan (1994) that she unequivocally garnered positive reviews from critics. The themes of her songs in that album not only highlighted greater recognition of women's rights, but they also underlined the importance of women's duties.
At the turn of the millennium, Shohreh continued releasing more albums, "Ghesseh Goo", "Saayeh", "Atr", "Safar", "Pishooni", and "Havas". Her music albums produced outside of Iran have since outnumbered her numbers before the revolution.


=== Recent involvements ===
In 2008, Shohreh held a concert at Kodak Theatre to mark the release of her CD "Ashegham". After "Ashegham" Shohreh released Esrar, Maloomeh, Dooset Daram Naro, Bargard and Shabet Bekheir.


== Discography ==


== References ==
Havas DVD. Nava Media Co. June 2005. Shohreh's Exclusive Interview
Tehran Magazine. Forouhar, Shohreh, or Helen: Whom Would You Pick as Best?  Issue 479.  Page 72–73.
http://www.Shohreh-solati.com


== External links ==
Shohreh on Instagram
Shohreh Concert at Royal Albert Hall, London, 1987 (VIDEO: PERSIAN EVE)