Mahathi. S, known by the mononym Mahathi is a Carnatic musician and playback singer for film songs in several Indian languages such as Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam and Punjabi.


== Playback singing ==
Mahathi's introduction to playback singing came in 2003 when she sang a duet, "Iyyaiyyo Pudichirukku", with Hariharan, under the music direction of Harris Jayaraj in the Tamil movie, Saamy. Although she had a previous experience singing a song ("Enna Maranthalum") under the music direction of Ilaiyaraja, the movie for which it was recorded, Kaadhal Jaathi, was not released.
In 2008, Mahathi won the Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer for the song "Naeraa Varattuma" from the movie "Nenje Nenje".Mahathi has since sung for movies in the Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, and Malayalam languages.She has more than 700 songs in all South Indian languages like Tamil, Telugu, Kannada,  Malayalam and Punjabi.


== Television works ==
Mahathi presented the music based quiz program, "Aaha Paadalam" on Doordarshan Podhigai TV with Raaghav. In October 2005 she presented Ilaiyaraja's Live-in Concert organised by Jaya TV, "Andrum Indrum Endrum" with actor Parthiban.Apart from hosting shows, Mahathi has also appeared as a judge for various music competition reality shows such as Kairali TV's "Gandharva Sangeetham" in 2013, and in seasons 2, 3, and 4 of Vijay TV's musical reality-talent shows Airtel Super Singer and Airtel Super Singer Junior. She was a guest judge in seasons 1, 2, and 3 of the Carnatic music reality-talent show Tanishq Swarna Sangeetham.
Mahathi has also recorded title songs for various TV serials in Vijay TV and Jaya TV, and several advertisement jingles for brands like Pothys, Chennai Silks, Sathya Agencies, RMKV, Ram Silks etc.


== Titles, awards, and other recognition ==
She had the Opportunity of performing for Dr.M.Bala Murali Krishna ‘s 75th Birthday Celebrations  with 75 Students of Mahathi Academy at The Music Academy in the presence of the honourable Ex Chief Minister of Tamil nadu Selvi. J.Jaya Lalitha.     She has performed with Leading musicians, Music Directors at Prestigious venues.
1998, All Kerala ICSE Award for Light Music
Best Singer Award from Ajantha Arts Academy for Aiyyayo Pudichirukku
Best Debut Singer Award from M. G. R. - Sivaji Arts Academy
Best Play Back Singer of 2008 from MGR SIVAJI ACADEMY, Kalaignar TV
2008, Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Female Playback (for "Naeraa Varattuma" from Nenjathai Killadhe)
2008, ITFA Best Female Playback Award (for "Mudhal Mazhai" from Bheema)
2009, Isai Aruvi Best Playback Singer Award, Mudhal Mazhai, Bheema
2011, "The Chord Wizard" (title), WE Magazine, Chennai, India
2017, Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Female Playback (for "Nenje Nenje" from Ayan)


=== Carnatic Music ===
An “A” grade artiste of the All India Radio / Doordarshan.
All Kerala ICSE Award for Light Music in 1996.
All Kerala State First Award for Carnatic Music in 2001.
Bala Bhaskara Award in 2001, for Excellence in Carnatic Music- VDS Arts Academy Chennai.
Best Performer Award from Sri Parthasarathy Swami Sabha in 2005.
Best Young Vocalist Award( For raga alapana) from the Music Academy, Chennai. 2006.
Innisai Ilayavani -2006
Innisai Ilavarasi -2007
Youth Excellence Award from the Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer Trust in the field of Carnatic Music in Dec 2008.
P. K. Chari Endowment Prize for the Best Concert of Gokulashtami Series 2010 from Sri Krishna Gana Sabha, Chennai
Sangeetha Seva Mani from Kanchi Kamakoti Peetadhipathi Sri . Sri. Jayendra Saraswathi Swamigal.
Yuva kala Bharathi – Bharath Kalachar -2011
Innisai Chudar Oli – 2013- Sydney
Gana Kala Vipanchee -2014- Vipanchee Trust
MS Subbalakshmi Endowment prize – Narada Gana Sabha, Chennai 2015
G. Ramnathan Award – Sri Parthsarathy Swamy Sabha, Chennai, 2015
Vani Kala Nipuna – Thyaga Brhama Gana Sabha, 2016
Isai Peroli - Kartik Fine Arts 2017
Music Academy 2018 - Best Pallavi Prize


== References ==