Aimee Elizabeth Mann is an American singer-songwriter. Over the course of four decades, she has released more than a dozen albums.
Mann was born in Richmond, Virginia, and studied at Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts. In the 1980s, after playing with the Young Snakes and Ministry, she co-founded the new wave band 'Til Tuesday and wrote their top-ten single "Voices Carry" (1985). The band released three albums and disbanded in 1990 when Mann left to pursue a solo career.
Mann released her first solo album, Whatever, in 1993, followed by I'm With Stupid in 1995. They received positive reviews but low sales. Mann achieved wider recognition when she recorded songs for the soundtrack to the Paul Thomas Anderson film Magnolia (1999), earning nominations for Academy Award for Best Original Song and Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal.
After Mann's record company Geffen refused to release her third solo album, Bachelor No. 2, Mann self-released it under her own label, SuperEgo Records, in 2000. She has released seven albums since. She has won two Grammy Awards, including Best Folk Album for Mental Illness (2017), and was named one of the world's ten greatest living songwriters by NPR in 2006.


== Early life ==

Mann was born outside Richmond, Virginia, in 1960. When she was three, her mother had an affair and became pregnant, and her parents divorced. Mann was kidnapped by her mother and her new boyfriend and taken to Europe, where they traveled. Her father hired a private detective, who brought her back from England a year later to a new stepmother and two stepbrothers. Mann did not see her mother again until she was 14. Mann believes the episode gave her post-traumatic stress disorder and anxiety around travelling later in life.Mann grew up in Bon Air, Virginia, attended Midlothian High School in Chesterfield County, and graduated from Open High School in Richmond. When Mann was 12, she told her family she wanted to learn to play the bass guitar. Her family ridiculed her, and she did not take up the instrument until later: "When I grew up, I was in charge of my own life. I became serious about music. I finally learned how to play bass. What they thought didn't matter." She said she learnt to play her brother's guitar when she was confined to bed with glandular fever at the age of 12.As a teenager, Mann enjoyed David Bowie and Iggy Pop, and found punk and new wave music inspiring. She said: "[It] was so interesting, so inventive – literally do whatever you want. That Patti Smith was out there and people were accepting her? Oh my God, there’s a way out." Feeling she did not fit in the "normal world", Mann enrolled in Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1978. She dropped out after 18 months and joined the Boston punk band the Young Snakes. She was unhappy in the band, saying the other members objected to her writing love songs or "any songs that had melody". She joined the industrial metal band Ministry, which she said helped her learn to write songs efficiently.


== Career ==


=== 1980s: 'Til Tuesday ===

In 1983, Mann founded the new wave band 'Til Tuesday in Boston with Berklee classmate and boyfriend Michael Hausman. They released Voices Carry, their debut album, in 1985. The single "Voices Carry" reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and won that year's MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist. According to Mann, "Voices Carry" was one of the first songs she wrote.'Til Tuesday released Welcome Home, their second album, the following year. Mann sang vocals with Geddy Lee on the 1987 single "Time Stand Still" by Rush, and appeared in the music video. 'Til Tuesday released their third and final album, Everything's Different Now, in 1988. 'Til Tuesday broke up in 1990 when Mann left to start her solo career. She said in 2018: "['Til Tuesday] were sort of doing, like, post-new-wave dance-pop stuff ... I started to feel like it was not really my thing. Acoustic guitar music was what I was more influenced by and what came naturally to me."


=== 1990s: Solo beginnings and Magnolia ===
Mann developed her first solo albums with producer and former 'Til Tuesday bandmate Jon Brion. Her debut solo album, Whatever, was released in 1993 on the independent label Imago. After she finished her second album, I'm With Stupid, Imago encountered financial problems; they eventually sold the album to Geffen, who signed Mann in 1994 and released I'm With Stupid in 1995. According to Pitchfork, Mann's first two solo albums showed that she was "a witty, self-possessed songwriter", but they did not meet sales expectations, with sales "in the low six figures". Mann began to be seen as "an 80s pop casualty" who was "approaching has-been status".Mann received wider recognition after she contributed songs to the 1999 film Magnolia. Her music had inspired the film; director Paul Thomas Anderson said he "sat down to write an adaptation of Aimee Mann songs". The film features dialogue taken from Mann's lyrics and a sequence in which the cast sing her song "Wise Up". The Magnolia soundtrack album was eventually certified gold. The song "Save Me" was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song and a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal; Mann performed it at the 72nd Academy Awards. Mann later said the song "really gave a blood transfusion to my career. But it wasn’t like I went from playing to five people to 5,000 people. It was just a real influx of energy."


=== 2000s: Bachelor No. 2, The Forgotten Arm, @#%&*! Smilers and label independence ===
Geffen refused to release Mann's third album, Bachelor No. 2, feeling it contained no hit singles. In response, Mann sold homemade EPs of her music on tour, a move she described as a "DIY fuck-you-record-company-I'm-selling-it-myself" gesture. When Geffen gave Mann the opportunity to leave her record contract, she took it; she said later: "I could not have gotten out of there fast enough."In 2000, Mann and her manager, former 'Til Tuesday bandmate Michael Hausman, formed their own label, SuperEgo Records, and bought the Bachelor No. 2 masters from Geffen. Mann sold 25,000 copies via mail order from her website, a large amount for an independent artist. After she secured a distribution deal, Bachelor No. 2 sold more than 200,000 copies, outperforming I'm With Stupid. Pitchfork described this as a "decisive victory"; a year earlier, Sony employee Gail Marowitz had predicted that Mann would make more money selling 70,000 albums independently than by selling 300,000 on a major label. In 2000, Mann also formed the Acoustic Vaudeville project, a mixture of music and comedy, with her husband, the songwriter Michael Penn. Among the comedians joining them for shows were Janeane Garofalo, Patton Oswalt and David Cross.
In 2001, Mann sued Universal Music over the release of a greatest-hits compilation, The Ultimate Collection, which she had not authorized and considered "substandard and misleading". She was also a judge at the inaugural Annual Independent Music Awards, a prize promoting independent musicians. She also judged the 2011 competition. In 2002, Mann released her fourth solo album, Lost in Space. In 2004, she released Live at St. Ann's Warehouse, a live album and DVD recorded at a series of shows in Brooklyn, New York City.In May 2005, Mann released The Forgotten Arm, a concept album set in the 1970s about two lovers who meet at the Virginia State Fair and go on the run. The album artwork earned a Grammy Award for Best Recording Package. In October 2006, Mann released One More Drifter in the Snow, a Christmas album featuring covers and new songs. Mann said she did not enjoy the approach of combining Christmas songs with modern genres, and instead drew inspiration from Christmas records by Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, Peggy Lee and the Vince Guaraldi Trio.In 2008, Mann released @#%&*! Smilers, with Grammy-nominated artwork by Gary Taxali. It debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 32 and on the Top Independent Albums chart at number 2. @#%&*! Smilers was met with mostly praise, with Billboard stating that it "pops with color, something that gives it an immediacy that's rare for an artist known for songs that subtly worm their way into the subconscious ... Smilers grabs a listener, never making him or her work at learning the record, as there are both big pop hooks and a rich sonic sheen." The music video for "31 Today", directed by Bobcat Goldthwait, features comedian Morgan Murphy.


=== 2010s: Charmer, Mental Illness and the Both ===
 
In May 2011, Mann performed for Barack and Michelle Obama at a poetry seminar at the White House. In 2012, she released her eighth solo album, Charmer, featuring a duet with James Mercer of the Shins. Two singles were released: "Charmer", with a music video directed by Tom Scharpling; and "Labrador," which featured actor Jon Hamm and references to Mann's music videos with 'Til Tuesday. In February 2013, Mann and Ted Leo formed a duo, the Both, and performed shows in Los Angeles and San Francisco. They released an album, The Both, in April 2014.On July 22, 2013, Mann filed a lawsuit against MediaNet Digital Inc., claiming they were distributing 120 of her songs on an expired license agreement. She attempted to claim as much as $18 million in statutory damages. Mann settled out of court in 2015.In February 2014, Mann appeared in "Giant Woman", an episode of Steven Universe, as the voice of the Gem fusion Opal. She reprised her role forSteven Universe: The Movie (2019); with Leo, she performed the song "Independent Together". In October 2016, Mann released a new song, "Can't You Tell", as part of the 30 Days 30 Songs campaign in protest of presidential candidate Donald Trump.In March 2017, Mann released her ninth solo album, Mental Illness. It won the Grammy Award for Best Folk Album at the 60th Annual Grammy Awards. In May, Mann and Coulton sang at the Revolution Hall of Portland, Oregon. That September, Mann contributed a song "Everybody Bleeds" to an episode of the Netflix series Big Mouth.In January 2018, Mann appeared in an episode of the FX series The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story as a bar singer, performing the 1984 Cars song "Drive". In 2019, Mann released an expanded 20th-anniversary reissue of Bachelor No. 2.


=== 2020s: Queens of the Summer Hotel ===
In 2020, Mann wrote an original song, "Big Deal", for the animated series Central Park, performed by Stanley Tucci. On November 5, 2021, she released Queens of the Summer Hotel, with songs inspired by Girl, Interrupted, the 1993 memoir by Susanna Kaysen about her time in a psychiatric hospital. Mann had developed the songs for a musical based on the memoir with producers Barbara Broccoli and Frederick Zollo, which was canceled by the COVID-19 pandemic.


== Influences and musicianship ==
Mann cited Leonard Cohen, Stephen Sondheim, Fiona Apple, and Jimmy Webb as artists she admires. The New York Times described Mann as a "formalist of pop songwriting" whose "verses, choruses and bridges arrive in their proper places and melodies trace a measured, symmetrical rise and fall".


== Personal life ==
In 1997, Mann married Michael Penn, brother of actors Sean Penn and Chris Penn. They met in 1993 while Mann was recording her first solo album, Whatever. They live in Los Angeles.In 2002, Mann checked into the Sierra Tucson rehab center with PTSD, severe dissociation, anxiety and depression. She was stressed by the pressure brought by the success of the Magnolia soundtrack, and was suffering from intrusive thoughts about car accidents after her tour bus was flipped by a drunk driver. In 2020, Mann developed a nervous system disorder that gave her tinnitus, migraines, nausea and dizziness and prevented her from listening to music for a year. She believed the disorder was triggered by a combination of childhood trauma and the stress of the COVID-19 pandemic.


== Discography ==

Whatever (1993)
I'm with Stupid (1995)
Bachelor No. 2 or, the Last Remains of the Dodo (2000)
Lost in Space (2002)
The Forgotten Arm (2005)
One More Drifter in the Snow (2006)
@#%&*! Smilers (2008)
Charmer (2012)
Mental Illness (2017)
Queens of the Summer Hotel (2021)


== Awards and nominations ==
Grammy Awards

Other awards


== Appearances on other artists' albums ==
In 1987, Mann provided backing vocals to Inside, Matthew Sweet's debut album. The same year, she performed backing vocals to "The Far Away Nearby", a song on Cyndi Lauper's second album, True Colors.
In 1987, she sang on Rush's song "Time Stand Still" on the album Hold Your Fire. The single is credited as "Rush (featuring Aimee Mann)".
In 1995, she recorded a cover version of Harry Nilsson's "One" on the album For the Love of Harry: Everybody Sings Nilsson and in 1996, "Baby Blue" on the Badfinger tribute album Come and Get It.
In 1997, Mann recorded a cover of "Nobody Does It Better", the theme song of the James Bond film The Spy Who Loved Me, on the album Shaken and Stirred: The David Arnold James Bond Project.In 1998 Mann contributed her song "Amateur" to the film Sliding Doors.In 2001, Mann recorded covers of The Beatles' "Two of Us" with Michael Penn, and "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" for the soundtrack of the film I Am Sam, though only the former was featured in the film.
In 2002, she contributed vocals on the song "This Far" from John Doe's album Dim Stars Bright Sky.
In 2004, Mann sang on the song "That's Me Trying" from William Shatner's album Has Been (co-written and produced by Ben Folds).In 2007, she contributed vocals on the song "Unforgiven" from John Doe's album A Year in the Wilderness.In 2012, she contributed vocals to Steve Vai's album The Story of Light, on the song "No More Amsterdam". That same year, she recorded the song "Two Horses" for the soundtrack of the film Tim and Eric's Billion Dollar Movie. Her song "Wise Up" was also used for an organ-donor campaign in Ontario. She contributed vocals to the song "Bigger Than Love" on Ben Gibbard's album Former Lives.In 2013, Mann was featured on the Ivan & Alyosha album All the Times We Had.In 2014, Mann contributed a version of Styx's "Come Sail Away" to the Community episode "Geothermal Escapism".


== Film and television appearances ==
In 1998, Aimee Mann made a cameo appearance in the film The Big Lebowski as a German nihilist who sacrifices her green-nail-polished right pinky toe in a kidnapping scheme.In 2002, Mann and her band appeared as themselves in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, performing her songs "This Is How It Goes" and "Pavlov's Bell" at the Bronze. She has one line in the episode: "Man, I hate playing vampire towns." The latter song also appears on the Buffy soundtrack album Radio Sunnydale. Also that year, she and her band appeared on The West Wing, where they performed a cover of James Taylor's "Shed a Little Light" at a Rock the Vote concert.In 2006, Mann appeared on an episode of the television series Love Monkey. In 2007, she contributed two original songs, "The Great Beyond" and "At the Edge of the World", for the soundtrack to Arctic Tale. In 2008, Mann appeared in the Comedy Central series Lewis Black's Root of All Evil in a comedic interview conducted by comedian Paul F. Tompkins.In 2010, Mann sang the opening theme song for One Tree Hill season 8 episode 10.In 2011, she appeared on the Independent Film Channel series Portlandia; in the sketch, she plays herself working as a cleaning woman, and tells Fred Armisen and Carrie Brownstein that she needs the second job to make ends meet.In 2013, Mann had a cameo on the April 8 episode of The Daily Show in a mock appeal to preserve the "habitat" of the crab louse, in a comedy segment about pubic shaving.
In 2014, Mann voice acted on Steven Universe, providing the voice of Opal in episode "Giant Woman".On November 20, 2014, Mann appeared with Dana Gould and Nick Offerman on @midnight on Comedy Central, and on March 21, 2016, Mann made a second appearance on the show with Jonathan Coulton and Dave Hill.On August 19, 2015 Mann appeared with the Both band member Ted Leo on Conan performing an unsolicited campaign song for 2016 presidential candidate Lincoln Chafee.In 2016, Mann covered the Carpenters' hit 1973 single "Yesterday Once More" for episode 2 of HBO's Vinyl. In the episode, Natalie Prass cameos as the visage of Karen Carpenter, lip syncing Mann's cover in a car with Olivia Wilde's character during a dream sequence.In 2016, Mann appeared as the moon in Little Big Awesome.
On January 24, 2018, Mann appeared as the character Peg Peterson on Comedy Central's Corporate in the episode "The Pain of Being Alive". She plays the part of an employee of the Hampton DeVille Company with a very desirable parking space. Mann does not sing and no songs are credited to her in this episode, although her song "Nothing is Good Enough" plays as her character is hit by a car.On February 7, 2018, she appeared in the fourth episode of The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story as a singer in a bar. Showrunner Ryan Murphy was insistent that Mann be chosen when it came to casting the role but, after initially turning down the Phil Collins song in the script, Mann instead suggested "Drive" by The Cars and sent a demo which the producers referred to as "a little piece of musical genius".In 2019 she had created her own podcast called The Art Of Process on which Ted Leo also appears as a co-host. The hosts of the show ask questions of various celebrities, such as Wyatt Cenac and Rebecca Sugar, to name a few.Also in 2019, she sang "Independent Together" along with Ted Leo (in his role of Steg, the fusion of Steven and Greg) in her role of Opal in Steven Universe: The Movie.
On October 11, 2019, her co-vocals on "Static on the Radio" by Jim White can be heard in  A Breaking Bad Movie credits.
In 2020, she recorded a cover of Leonard Cohen's song "Avalanche" for use over the opening credits of HBO's I'll Be Gone In The Dark, based on the book of the same name by Michelle McNamara.
In 2021, she sang "Siren's Melody" in her role of River Siren in Summer Camp Island.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Aimee Mann at AllMusic
Aimee Mann at Curlie
Aimee Mann's discography at Discogs
Aimee Mann at Rolling Stone
Aimee Mann Live Interview/Performance on KCMP (2005)
Aimee Mann Live Interview/Performance on KCMP (2008)
Aimee Mann at NPR Music
Aimee Mann at IMDb
Aimee Mann's Off-The-Wall Christmas Concert on NPR.prg
Aimee Mann Live at St. Ann's Warehouse (Performs "The Moth")