Jennie Lee Riddle (born April 22, 1967) is an American Christian songwriter, best known for penning "Revelation Song", first made popular by Gateway Worship and Kari Jobe, and carried to No. 1 by Phillips, Craig & Dean. The song enjoyed a 17-week run at No. 1 on Christian radio per Billboard. "Revelation Song" has been recorded in multiple languages and has appeared on numerous albums. Most recently, the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America, an honor attributed to songs with over 500,000 units sold.
Riddle also co-wrote "When the Stars Burn Down,"  "Hope of the Broken World" and "The One That Really Matters" recently recorded on the Michael W. Smith album entitled Sovereign. She has been nominated for five Dove awards, and awarded three; Songwriter of the Year, Worship Song of the Year (for "Revelation Song") and Inspirational Song of the Year (for "Hope of the Broken World" by Selah. Her songs are some of the most performed on CCLI (a company specializing in copyright licensing of Christian music), ranking in the top 10 since 2010.
Jennie's music has been recorded and performed by many other artists as well, including NewSong, Shane & Shane, JJ Heller, Jesus Culture, Gateway Worship, Chris Tomlin, Diante do Trono, Passion, Meredith Andrews, Travis Ryan, Newsboys, Sandi Patti, Guy Penrod and Rebecca St. James, to name a few. Her songs have been used among the largest Christian Conferences in the world including Passion, Experience Conference and National Worship Leader Convention hosted by Worship Leader, among many others.
2011 saw the release of the title-track song "One True God", featured on NewSong's latest album. The song was also performed by them during a Winter Jam Tour in 2012, billed as the world's largest Christian music tour.
The newest musical endeavor of Jennie's is the forming of People & Songs community, the 1st release of her Opus Collective, and the subsequent 1st release in the Simple Collection Series, "I Stand Before Almighty God Alone".  Opus 1 enjoyed a No. 1 debut on iTunes and has since received all five-star reviews, in addition to being touted by Worship Leader Magazine as the Indie Best of Best for 2012 and listed in the top 10 albums of 2012 by New Release Tuesday. "I Stand Before Almighty God Alone" has enjoyed a grass-roots spread through the churches after its debut at the Linger Conference in Dallas Texas in 2014.
In addition to songwriting, Riddle is also a worship leader, teacher, and church music consultant. She regularly teaches at conferences and events all over the world, and is a partner manager of Analyze My Song and owner manager at The Emerging Sound, a summer camp for creative teens.
She currently resides in Laporte, Indiana with her team, and pours into the community with music and service.
Jennie additionally works as a staff writer for Integrity Music and as a recruiter for the National Praise and Worship Institute.  She volunteers her remaining time to the Gospel Music Association where she serves as co-coordinator for Immerse. She has been married to Darrin Riddle for over 25 years, and together they have four children; Daniel, Emily, David, and Andrew. Jennie and Darrin live bi-locationally in Texas and Tennessee.
Actively teaching and mentoring, Jennie can be found at classrooms, churches and conventions around the world ministering to songwriters and artists. She says, "the next chapter of my life will surely involve caring for the Church by caring for its creatives. I've been doing it for 25 years and don't intend on stopping until I meet Jesus face-to-face."


== Song credits ==
Some of the songs written by Riddle are:
"Revelation Song" – Kari Jobe, Gateway Worship, and Phillips, Craig & Dean
"One True God" (co-written with Don Poythress and Tony Wood) – NewSong
"Hope of the Broken World" (co-written with Carl Cartee) – Selah
"You Are My Shepherd" (co-written with Jonathan Lee) – Tricia Brock (Superchick)
"When The Stars Burn Down (Blessings & Honor)" (co-written with Jonathan Lee) – Rebecca St. James and Phillips, Craig & Dean
"Dwelling Place" – Kari Jobe and Gateway Worship
"King of This World" (co-written with Crystal Yates) – Rebecca Pfortmiller and Gateway Worship
"It Is Finished" – (co-written (Matt Papa)
"This Is My Father's World -(co-written with Aaron Purdy) (CCLI)
"The One That Really Matters – (co-written with Dustin Smith)
"I Stand Before Almighty God Alone" -(co-written with string-arranger Brandon Michael Collins)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Jennie Lee Riddle Official website
People & Songs Official website
Jennie Lee Riddle music