Patrick Reynolds, professionally known as Plain Pat, is an American music executive, record producer and songwriter, perhaps best known for managing the respective early careers of American musicians Kanye West and Kid Cudi. He is also noted for working with prominent artists such as Drake, Alicia Keys, Mary J. Blige, Lupe Fiasco,  Ghostface Killah, The Roots, Lloyd, Young Gunz, Ashanti, Ludacris, Freeway, Ja Rule, N.O.R.E. and The Mutton Birds among others.
Plain Pat is credited with working on several high-profile albums. He has produced on albums such as Thank Me Later, Element of Freedom, Stronger with Each Tear, 808's and Heartbreak, Man on the Moon II: The Legend of Mr. Rager, Man on the Moon: The End of Day, A Kid Named Cudi, Graduation, The Life of Pablo and more. He has also served as an A&R on the following albums More Fish, Game Theory, Fishscale, The College Dropout, Southside, Tough Luv, Fefe Dobson, Ashanti's Christmas, Chicken-N-Beer, Chapter II, Philadelphia Freeway, Last Temptation, God's Favorite, Tical 0: The Prequel and Flock: The Best of the Mutton Birds.


== Career and ventures ==
In 2007, Plain Pat mixed and hosted Kanye West's mixtape Can't Tell Me Nothing. In 2009, Plain Pat, along with fellow record producer Emile Haynie and recording artist Kid Cudi, launched their record label Dream On, in partnership with Kanye West's GOOD Music and Universal Motown. Cudi announced in February 2011 however, that the label had been dissolved. Cudi stated to Complex magazine that they were still on good terms: "I wanted to try something new, and I wanted to take control of things myself.[...] There’s no hard feelings." The label released Kid Cudi's albums, Man on the Moon: The End of Day (2009) and Man on the Moon II: The Legend of Mr. Rager (2010). 
In 2010, Plain Pat also worked on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy with Kanye West.
In 2015, Plain Pat and Kid Cudi reunited  with Speedin' Bullet 2 Heaven. Plain Pat also contributed to Kanye West's The Life of Pablo in 2016, as well as the Kid Cudi and Kanye West collaborative project Kids See Ghosts in 2018.


== Legacy ==
In a 2021 interview, American producer Dot da Genius spoke on Plain Pat: “I just have to go on record and say Plain Pat is a very elusive, mythical figure in our industry. He's done so many legendary things and his taste level... You want to get Plain Pat to like your music, because then you know you got something.”


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==
A Man Named Scott (2021) - Himself


== References ==


== External links ==
Plain Pat at AllMusic
Patrick "Plain Pat" Reynolds at AllMusic
Patrick "Plain Pat" Reynolds at Artistdirect
Plain Pat discography at Discogs
Plain Pat discography at MusicBrainz