Katherine Hoover (December 2, 1937 – September 21, 2018) is remembered by the National Flute Association as an "artist—flutist, teacher, entrepreneur, poet, and, most notably, a distinguished composer". Her work received many honors, including a National Endowment Composer's Fellowship, an Academy of Arts and Letters Award in composition, the National Flute Association's Lifetime Achievement Award.Her career as a composer began at a time when few women composers earned recognition in classical music in the 1970s. As shown in her list of known work, below, she has composed pieces for solo flute, mixed ensembles, chamber orchestra, choir acapella, full orchestra and many other combinations of instruments and voice. Some of her flute pieces incorporated Native American themes.


== Early life and education ==
Hoover was born in Elkins, West Virginia, on December 2, 1937. Her mother was a painter/artist and editor, and her father was a biochemist. Her family lived in Washington, D.C., then moved to Philadelphia during World War II. She attended school in Philadelphia.She remembered hearing Mozart's music on a record player when she was three years old. She also recalled reading music as early as four years old, before she could read words. Her parents supported her artistic interests, rescuing a piano being disposed of by a neighbor and starting her at piano lessons at five years old. She began flute lessons at age eight. During this time, she discovered that she had perfect-pitch. During interviews, she has shared she received "mediocre music instruction" during her early years.Hoover began her academic studies at the University of Rochester in 1955. After two years of general studies she was accepted to Eastman School of Music, where she studied with flutist Joseph Mariano, and began studying composition. She graduated with a Bachelor of Music in Music Theory and a Performer's Certificate in Flute in 1959. Unfortunately, her composition classes left a bad impression. Hoover comments, "There were no women involved with composition at all. [I got] rather discouraged – being the only woman in my classes, not being paid attention to and so forth."Hoover attended the Yale Summer Sessions in 1960 and 1961, where she studied flute, theory, and composition. During this time, she also studied with flutist William Kincaid in Philadelphia.


== Teaching career ==
From 1962–1969, Hoover taught flute at the Juilliard Preparatory School as well as a few other small schools, including the Third Street Music School. It was at the Third Street Music School that she received her first positive experience as a composer. She was asked to compose a piece for a school concert, a duet for violins, which was very well received. She married John Schwab in 1964. They divorced after eight years.  


=== Manhattan School of Music ===
In 1969, Hoover began teaching flute and theory at the Manhattan School of Music. She shared that, as a theory teacher she learned a great deal about compositional techniques, as it forced her to carefully analyze a wide spectrum of music scores. Also, during this time at Manhattan, she continued her graduate studies and received her Master of Music in Music Theory in 1974. It was also where she studied how other people identify with sounds.  She was a faculty member of Manhattan School of Music for seventeen years.The first publication of her work was Three Carols (1972) for choir and flute, published by Carl Fischer. 
Hoover was honored as a finalist for the Kennedy-Friedheim Contest's Outstanding New American Chamber Work award (1978). Her successes continued, becoming a finalist once again and being awarded a National Endowment for the Arts Composer's Fellowship (1979).


=== Teachers College, Columbia University ===
Hoover became a faculty member at the Teachers College, Columbia University (1984-1989), where she taught theory and composition to graduate students.


== Founded Papagena Press ==
Hoover co-founded Papagena Press, with her husband (Richard Goodwin, m.1985 ) in 1988 to publish her works. The first piece to be published was Kokopeli (1990), a work for solo flute inspired by the Hopi tribe and the American Southwest. It won the National Flute Association's Newly Published Music Competition (1991). This was Hoover's second of six NFA Newly Published Music awards. A list of her known works is listed chronologically below. Many predate Papagena Press. As her career spans many forms of media, LP to Cassette to CD to digital, and at-least two generations of copyright, her lists of works might appear disjointed.


== Promoting women in music ==
Hoover was involved with women's arts organizations and has worked to bring the works of women composers to the public's notice. She began work with the Women's Inter-Art Center in New York (1977). Here she organized Festivals I, II, and III of Women's Music which presented music by fifty-five historical and contemporary women composers.She was the composer in residence for the Fourth Festival of Women Composers at Indiana University of Pennsylvania (1996).


== Poetry ==
Hoover had always written poetry since her youth finding both a striking difference and similarity between music and words. “This Way About”(2015). was her first book of poetry where she shares glimpses into her life.


== Selected memoirs ==
Over Hoover's career she has shared a short series of memoirs; here are a few selected passages. 

Katherine shared her thankfulness, "owing much of her success to her mentor, William Kincaid, teaching her more about music than any other composer...".
Katherine also shared how she "valued the hundreds of scores she studied", I have always believed they made me a better player, theorist, teacher, and conductor".
Regarding her compositions; "I have feelings of pride for the successes writing works for specific performers using other instruments...Stitch-te Naku for Cello and Orchestra, for cellist Sharon Robinson and her Clarinet Concerto, for jazz clarinetist Eddie Daniels.
Katherine was surprised being asked, "How do you technically compose? Did you ever experiment with your flute or piano?" Happily she responded, I compose a whole piece in my imagination."
Katherine shared, "Out of all of my achievements in music, I was overcome with the success of Kokopeli."


== Honors and awards ==
Member Laureate, Sigma Alpha Iota
Kennedy Center Friedheim Award, Outstanding New American Chamber Work, finalist, 1978, 1979
National Endowment for the Arts Composer's Fellowship, 1979
National Flute Association Newly Published Music Competition, 1987, 1991, 1993, 1994, 2006, 2020(co-winner)
New York State Music Teachers' Association, Composer of the Year, 1989
American Academy of Arts and Letters Academy Award in Composition, 1994
New York Flute Club Tribute Concert for Katherine Hoover, 2013
National Flute Association Lifetime Achievement Award, 2016
Global Music Awards, Silver Medalist, May 2018


== Known works, chronological ==


== Discography ==
Hoover has a work recorded and issued on CD:

Journeys: Orchestral Works by American Women -- Leonarda Productions, LE327, 1985. Features Hoover's Summer Night 1985, and also includes music of Nancy Van De Vate, Kay Gardner, Libby Larsen, Marga Richter, Ursula Mamlok, Jane Brockman. Performed by Bournemouth Sinfonietta, Arioso Chamber Orchestra, Carolann Martin: Conductor.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Katherine Hoover at AllMusic
Katherine Hoover at Discogs
Katherine Hoover at Musicalics, The Classical Composers Database
Thesis/dissertation, M.M. Manhattan School of Music 1972
Thesis/dissertation, Research project (D.M.A.)--University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1994.