Tamarat Makonnen (born March 16, 1972, San Francisco, California) is an American film director, producer and writer. Makonnen is a graduate of Virginia Union University with a degree in English Language Arts. The native New Yorker received his professional break directing the music video "The Beginning of the End" for EMI recording artists Boogiemonsters. The New World Order inspired music video displayed a dark society where those who opposed the new government were detained for scientific experiments and tracked with barcodes in their hands. The video led to Makonnen creating music videos and electronic press kits (EPK) for an array of artists including: R&B singer Ne-Yo, Tupac Shakur collaborator C-Bo and political hip hop duo dead prez. 
Makonnen has directed several music videos for dead prez, including the controversial "They Schools", a blistering indictment of the nation's deteriorating school system. At the time of its release, the video was banned from national video outlets due to its arresting imagery and subject matter. The video and its subsequent ban have since been discussed in several books including, "Stand & Deliver: Political Activism, Leadership, and Hip Hop Culture" by Yvonne Bynoe; "Race and Resistance: African Americans in the 21st Century" by Herb Boyd; and "Rap Music and Culture" by Kate Burns. Makonnen followed up "They Schools" with a second dead prez video, the critically acclaimed "Mind Sex". The song and video featured spoken word by poet Abiodun Oyewole of The Last Poets. The video aired nationwide and overseas. Both "They Schools" and "Mind Sex" are from dead prez's seminal debut album Let's Get Free. 
In 2009 Makonnen made his feature film debut, directing the American drama film Dreams and Shadows starring James Russo and Shawn-Caulin Young.
In 2013 Makonnen directed the award-winning documentary In Search of the Black Knight. The film takes a comedic and thought-provoking look at the current state of African-American relationships.
Makonnen has produced and directed for several web series including: The New Shade of Black and The Unwritten Rules, which is based on creator Kim Williams' book 40 Hours and an Unwritten Rule: The Diary of an African-American Woman.
Various entertainment publications have covered Makonnen's work including XXL, IndieWire and Billboard.
Makonnen is of African-American and Ethiopian descent. His great grandfather Makonnen Endelkachew and great uncle Endelkachew Makonnen both served as Ethiopia’s Prime Minister under Emperor Haile Selassie.


== External links ==
Tamarat Makonnen at IMDb
Official Website