Timothy Charles Smith (3 July 1961 – 21 July 2020) was an English singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, record producer and music video director who gained attention as frontman of Cardiacs as well as co-founder of the group with his brother Jim Smith. In 1998, he started the band Spratleys Japs with his partner Joanne Spratley.Born in Carshalton, Smith formed his first band as a teenager. In 1977, he formed the band Cardiac Arrest, which evolved into Cardiacs in 1981. He was the group's lead writer, and gradually became lead vocalist as previous vocalists Michael Pugh and Mark Cawthra left the band. Smith was characterised for the complexity and wit in his music, writings, drawings, on film and in interviews. In 1985, he wrote the comic Peter and His Dog Spot, a collection of ironic comedy and line drawings. Starting with 1987's "Big Ship", his songs were adopted as anthems for the Alphabet Business Concern label.
From 1992 to 1999, Smith produced several records for projects outside of Cardiacs, including The Sea Nymphs' debut album, his first solo LP Tim Smith's Extra Special OceanLandWorld, and the album Pony with Joanne Spratley. After attending a My Bloody Valentine gig in 2008, he suffered a cardiac arrest, leaving him with the condition dystonia and ending activity with Cardiacs. Since then, Smith slowly recovered with help of a JustGiving fundraising campaign and, in 2016, returned with the Sea Nymphs album On the Dry Land. He never fully recovered and died from a heart attack four years after the album's release.
As a performer, writer or co-writer, Smith had only one charting single in the UK. Sing to God, his most critically acclaimed album, ranked 53rd for Top Albums of 1996 on Best Ever Albums. In 2018, Smith was honoured with the Doctor of Music degree from the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland.


== Early years: 1961–1977 ==

Smith was born in Carshalton on 3 July 1961, the younger brother of Jim Smith. They both acquired an interest in music around 1972 from their neighbourhood friend Geoff Shelton buying an electric guitar. Jim Smith bought a bass guitar so that he and Geoff could play a blues riff together, while Smith owned a snare drum and would drum with them. The next year, Shelton lent Smith an LP on how to play the guitar, teaching him to play the G chord during a visit. Smith learnt the song "Frankie and Johnny", and played it whilst his mum sang. Around the same time, he heard a section on a record that "[made] his stomach go funny and [gave] him goosebumps". It changed his perception of music, and may have inspired the sound of his compositions. After that, Jim stopped playing bass until 1977.
Some songs written by Smith at around age 13, notably "Interlude" from their debut album and "Billion" from Sing to God, would later be made into Cardiacs tracks. In an interview, Smith commented about his songs written at a young age:

It depends on what year they were done, but we were really only youngsters then. A few songs have popped up on the later albums that I wrote when I was about thirteen. The one on [Sing to God] called "Billion", I did it when I was thirteen. Sometimes I put an old one on that I made when I was little, just for luck. "Interlude" on A Little Man and a House ... is another one. I just found it laying around on a bit of paper and thought "Ah, let's stick that one on it!" It's all for superstitious reasons, really.
Smith attended Fleetwood Secondary School in Chessington with his friend Colvin Mayers. There, he met Mark Cawthra and Peter Tagg, who would later play in Cardiacs. In 1975, Smith and Cawthra formed an unnamed group with organist David Philpot. They played instrumentals inspired by Egg. The band never played live and Dave Philpot died a few years later. His miniKORG synthesiser was later inherited by Cardiacs.Cawthra was suspended from school and, after staying at the Kaleidoscope hotel in Kingston, moved to York. During that time, he and Smith would send each other tapes of unkind songs they had written for each other. Smith played in another band in 1976 with the Sound frontman Adrian Borland and rock drummer Bruce Bizland. They played only two gigs, never had a name, and reportedly sounded like the instrumentals on The Man Who Sold the World.


== The Filth to Cardiacs: 1977–2008 ==


=== Formation, demos and line-up changes: 1977–1984 ===
At the age of 16, Smith formed a rock group, the Filth. Often misremembered as "Philip Pilf and the Filth", the group was established by Smith in 1977. The same year, the Filth wrote the song "Icky Qualms" and played their first gig the Kaleidoscope hotel, "a hostel for misfits and that". Smith arranged the group with Peter Tagg on drums, Jim on bass, himself on guitar and Michael Pugh on vocals. Mick Pugh, a friend of Jim's, was chosen due to his shouty voice.In 1979, Smith helped record a 7", A Bus for a Bus on the Bus, at Elephant Studios in London. 1980 saw Smith recording the first and only Cardiac Arrest album, The Obvious Identity. Eventually, 1000 cassettes were recorded, but only sold at concerts to save on expenditure.Smith decided to change the name of the band to Cardiacs in 1981. He helped record the band's first album, Toy World, in the same manner as the Cardiac Arrest album – on cassette tape – at a small basement studio known as Crow Studios.  After another line up change, Smith recruited Tim Quy (percussion), Sarah Cutts (saxophone) and Dominic Luckman (drums).


=== Studio years, side projects and solo work: 1984–2008 ===
The label Alphabet Business Concern was created in 1984. Smith was asked by vocalist Fish to support his band Marillion on their forthcoming tour near the end of the year.  Smith agreed but was not prepared for the hostile audience that awaited them on all legs of the tour (forcing them off the final three days of the tour). From then until 1999, Cardiacs released six studio albums, as well as a number of singles, EPs and live albums.During the 1990s, Smith took a break from Cardiacs to work on various other projects. During 1989 and 1991, he wrote songs for a solo album, Tim Smith's Extra Special OceanLandWorld, eventually released in 1995. Smith, his ex wife Sarah Smith, and William D. Drake were reunited as The Sea Nymphs, a "gentler" version of Cardiacs; they had recorded before in 1984 and released a cassette album, Mr and Mrs Smith and Mr Drake. Smith also performed with Jo Spratley in Spratleys Japs, who released their album Pony in 1999.In March 2006, Smith toured with Ginger & The Sonic Circus as their support act, performing acoustic versions of Cardiacs' songs, along with his own material. Cardiacs released their only single of the 2000s, "Ditzy Scene", in 2007.


== Illness: 2008–2020 ==
On 25 June 2008, Smith suffered a heart attack after attending a gig by My Bloody Valentine which caused brain damage through hypoxia and led him to develop the rare neurological condition dystonia.In 2013, 2015 and 2017, events dubbed The Alphabet Business Convention were held in celebration of and with all proceeds funding Smith and his ongoing recovery. Among other things, they featured live music from bands within the Cardiacs' circle.In July 2016, a special one-day concert took place in Preston, called The Whole World Window with all the funds going towards helping Smith get better. A cassette and CD album of the same name were also released via Hyena Inc containing performances by the same bands. In January 2018 an appeal was launched on the crowdfunding website JustGiving with the aim of raising £40,000 to fund Smith's ongoing care. The target amount was exceeded in the first day and a new target of £100,000 was set to provide for a year's care.On 25 October 2018, Smith received the honorary degree of Doctor of Music from the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland. His brother Jim accepted the honour on his behalf.


== Death: 21 July 2020 ==
Smith died on the evening of 21 July 2020 at the age of 59, following another heart attack. His death was announced by his brother and bandmate Jim Smith and bandmate Kavus Torabi. Musicians including Steven Wilson, Mike Patton, Graham Coxon and Dave Rowntree of Blur paid tribute to Smith.


== Work as producer and video director ==
Smith owned and operated his own recording studio Apollo 8 (at various locations, with the final one being near Salisbury, Wiltshire) and had a long list of production credits to his name.  Since the early 1990s, Smith  produced recordings for a variety of musicians and musical groups, many of whom belong to the so-called "Cardiacs family". These include Levitation, Sidi Bou Said, Eat, The Monsoon Bassoon, Wildhearts frontman Ginger (including his Silver Ginger 5 and Howling Willie Cunt projects), Stars in Battledress, Oceansize, William D. Drake, The Shrubbies, The Scaramanga Six and The Trudy.Smith created and/or edited pop videos for various bands including Sepultura, Dark Star, Zu and The Frank and Walters, as well as Cardiacs. In 2008, Smith created a film called The Wildhearts Live in the Studio: A Film By Tim Smith, featuring The Wildhearts playing their self-titled album along with surreal interludes.


== Discography ==


=== Solo ===
Tim Smith's Extra Special OceanLandWorld (Alphabet Business Concern, 1995)


=== With Joanne Spratley ===
Pony (All My Eye and Betty Martin Music, 1999)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Cardiacs homepage
Cardiacs Museum (tribute page)
Cardiacs Lyrics Organ (searchable lyrics database)
Tim Smith discography at Discogs
2016 Sea Nymphs interview with Prog Magazine, Tim's first interview since his accident