Misaki Iwasa (岩佐 美咲, Iwasa Misaki, born January 30, 1995 in Chiba Prefecture) is a Japanese idol. She is a former member of the Japanese idol group AKB48 and enka singer.  Her nickname is Wasamin. Her talent agency is Nagara Productions. She was also a member of the sub-unit Watarirouka Hashiritai 7.


== Career ==
2008

December - Passed "AKB48's 4th Trainee Audition" and started her career as AKB48's 7th generation.2009

August 23 - During "Sokaku Matsuri" concert, it was announced that she was chosen to be a regular member. However, it took almost a year before the new teams started their theater shows, so she only officially became a member of Team A as of 27 July 2010. During the long wait, she was quite distressed about the situation and said, "I knew I had to do something, but I didn't know what to do."
September 27 - Participated in AKB48's first oversea solo concert in New York. She was the only trainee alongside Sumire Sato.
October 30 - Participated in AKB48's first musical troupe "∞・Infinity".2010

May 17 - Moved agency from AKS to Production Ogi.
May 18 to 23 - Starred alongside Haruka Kohara (ex-SDN48 member) and Moeno Nito in Team Imagine's theater show "Ramerame" (らめらめ). It was her first leading role in a stage show.
June 30 - Became a member of Watarirouka Hashiritai 7, a sub-unit consisting of AKB48 members attached to Production Ogi.
July 27 - Officially debuted as a member of Team A.2011

March 20 - Following the tsunami in Japan, she was one of two AKB48 members to perform at the "Japan Aid" Concert at Hilton Guam. She sang "Sakura no Ki ni Narō".
March 29 - Announced in Team A's theater show that she is moving agency from Production Ogi to Nagara Production, a big agency handling famous enka singers such as Kiyoshi Hikawa and Yutaka Yamakawa, to pursue her singing career as an enka singer.
April 1 - Officially joined Nagara Production, but she remained an active member of Watarirouka Hashiritai 7.2012

February 1 - Released her first solo debut, "Mujin Eki" (無人駅, "Ghost Station") under Tokuma Japan Communications. She was the third AKB48 member to release a solo CD after Tomomi Itano and Atsuko Maeda, and the first enka singer in AKB48. She held her first solo release event on January 31 in Shinbashi Station Square.
April 3 - Her first solo radio show "Konbanwasamin" (こんばんわさみん) started broadcasting on TBS channel every Wednesday at 3:30 am.
June 6 - Ranked 33rd in AKB48 27th Single Senbatsu General Election, and became the center of Next Girls.
July 29 - Held "Singing Mujin Eki (Ghost Station) in Ghost Station" event in Kuniyoshi Station of Izumi Railroad. After the event, she assumed the role of train conductor and rode the one-day only "Wasamin Train" (わさみん号) with 40 fans chosen by lottery.
August 24 - During AKB48 in Tokyo Dome concert, it was announced that she will be moving to New Team B.
October 20 - During "Mujin Eki Photo Contest Awarding" event, it was announced that she will release her 2nd single on early 2013.
November 1 - Officially became a member of Team B.
November 3 - Participated as a starting member of Team B's Waiting Show.2013

January 9 - Released her second solo single, "Moshimo Watashi ga Sora ni Sundeitara" (もしも私が空に住んでいたら, "If I were Living in the Sky") under Tokuma Japan Communications. She held release events every day for a week from January 7 to 13 in various places. She debuted 6th in Oricon Daily Ranking, but successfully ranked 5th in Oricon Weekly Ranking.2014

January 20 - Her single "鞆の浦慕情" debuted at number one on the weekly Oricon Singles Chart.2016

March 14 - Graduated from the group.
March 21 - Her last activity from the group.


== Discography ==


=== AKB48 singles ===
2009"River"
"Hikoukigumo" (ひこうき雲) - Theater Girls2010"Ponytail to Shushu"
"Nusumareta Kuchibiru" (盗まれた唇) - Under Girls
"Heavy Rotation"
"Lucky Seven" (ラッキーセブン) - as a substitute of Miho Miyazaki in music video
"Beginner"
"Boku Dake no Value" (僕だけのvalue) - Under Girls
"Chance no Junban"
"Kurumi to Dialogue" (胡桃とダイアローグ) - Team A2011"Sakura no Ki ni Narō"
"Area K" (エリアK) - DIVA
"Everyday, Kachusha"
"Hito no Chikara" (人の力) - Under Girls
"Kaze wa Fuiteiru"
"Kimi no Senaka" (君の背中) - Under Girls
"Ue kara Mariko"
"Rinjin wa Kizutsukanai" (隣人は傷つかない) - Team A2012"Give Me Five!"
"Hitsujikai no Tabi" (羊飼いの旅) - Special Girls B
"Manatsu no Sounds Good!"
"Mitsu no Namida" (3つの涙) - Special Girls
"Kimi no Tame ni Boku wa..." (君のために僕は…) - only in Theater ver. CD
"Gingham Check"
"Do Re Mi Fa Onchi" (ドレミファ音痴) - Next Girls
"Uza"
"Seigi no Mikata Janai Hero" (正義の味方じゃないヒーロー) - Team B
"Eien Pressure"
"Watashitachi no Reason" (私たちのReason) - only in Theater ver. CD2013"So Long!"
"Sokode inu no unchi fun jau ka ne?" (そこで犬のうんち踏んじゃうかね？) - Team B
"Sayonara Crawl"
"Romance Kenjuu" (ロマンス拳銃) - Team B


=== Watarirouka Hashiritai 7 ===
"Valentine Kiss" (バレンタイン・キッス)
"Hetappi Wink" (へたっぴウィンク)
"Kibō Sanmyaku" (希望山脈)
"Shōnen yo Uso o Tsuke!" (少年よ 嘘をつけ!)


=== Unit Songs in Theater ===
Team A 5th Stage "Ren'ai Kinshi Jorei" (チームA 5th Stage「恋愛禁止条例」公演)

Squall no Aida ni (スコールの間に) as backdancer
Manatsu no Christmas Rose (真夏のクリスマスローズ) as backdancer
Ren'ai Kinshi Jorei (恋愛禁止条例) as substitute of Miho MiyazakiTeam K 4th Stage "Saishu Bell ga Naru" (チームK 4th Stage「最終ベルが鳴る」公演)

Gomenne Jewel (ごめんねジュエル) as backdancerTeam B 3rd Stage "Pajama Drive" (チームB 3rd Stage「パジャマドライブ」公演)

Junjou Shugi (純情主義) as backdancerTeam B 4th Stage "Idol no Yoake" (チームB 4th Stage「アイドルの夜明け」公演)

Substitute of Aika Ota in all songsKataomoi no Taikakusen (片思いの対角線) as backdancer
Tengoku Yarou (天国野郎) as backdancerTeam K 5th Stage "Sakaagari" (チームK 5th Stage「逆上がり」公演)

Substitute of Rina Chikano in all songs (when Yuko Oshima was absent)Ai no Iro (愛の色) as a substitute of Manami OkuTeam Trainee "Idol no Yoake" (研究生「アイドルの夜明け」公演)

Kuchiutsushi no Chocolate (口移しのチョコレート)
Tengoku Yarou (天国野郎) as backdancerTheater G-Rosso Yume o Shinaseru wake ni ikanai (夢を死なせるわけにいかない」)

Tonari no Banana (となりのバナナ) as stand-by for Tomomi Kasai, Reina Fujie, Aki Takajo, or Haruka NakagawaTeam A 6th Stage "Mokugekisha" (チームA 6th Stage「目撃者」公演)

Hoshi no Mukougawa (☆の向こう側)
Ude o Kunde (腕を組んで) as substitute of Haruka Nakagawa or Atsuko MaedaTeam B Waiting Show (チームB ウェイティング公演)

Gomenne Jewel (ごめんね ジュエル)


== Solo discography ==


=== Singles ===
*RIAJ Digital Tracks established April 2009.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official profile
Official blog
Misaki Iwasa  -   Google+(in Japanese)
Misaki Iwasa on Twitter 
Misaki Iwasa at IMDb