Johannes Kerkorrel (27 March 1960 – 12 November 2002), born Ralph John Rabie, was a South African singer-songwriter, journalist and playwright.


== Career ==
Rabie, who was born in Johannesburg, worked as a journalist for the Afrikaans newspapers Die Burger and Rapport. In 1986, Rabie started performing politically themed cabaret at arts festivals under his new stage name (kerkorrel meaning church organ in Afrikaans). At that time, apartheid was at its nadir under State President P.W. Botha's National Party-led government.
In 1987, Rabie was fired by Rapport for using quotes from Botha's speeches in his music; he then became a full-time musician and performer under the name Johannes Kerkorrel en die Gereformeerde Blues Band (Johannes Kerkorrel and the Reformed Blues Band), a deliberate reference to the Reformed Church. The band also included the Afrikaans singer-songwriter Koos Kombuis. Their brand of new Afrikaans music was dubbed alternatiewe Afrikaans (alternative Afrikaans) and exposed divergent political views to a new generation of Afrikaners.In 1985, they released the album Eet Kreef (Eat Crayfish) on the now-defunct Shifty Records label, which was a commercial success despite its tracks being banned from radio airplay by the state-controlled South African Broadcasting Corporation, which was the government mouthpiece. Colloquially, 'Eet Kreef' is ambiguous, meaning either 'Enjoy!' or 'Get lost!'. The subsequent regional tour of college campuses and art festivals was called Voëlvry (literally free as a bird but here meaning outlawed), and Rabie's controversial reinvention of Afrikaans popular music became known as the Voëlvry movement.In 1990, Rabie visited Amsterdam, and almost simultaneously the track "Hillbrow" from the Eet Kreef album became a hit in Belgium, and Rabie followed its success with a solo tour. In subsequent years he enjoyed substantial artistic success in Belgium and the Netherlands, and spent much of his time in Belgium.  Here he also befriended Stef Bos, a Dutch cabaret artist, with whom he would share a number of concerts.


== Death ==
Rabie hanged himself on 12 November 2002 in Kleinmond, near Hermanus on the Western Cape coast on a tree that is alien to South Africa. He was survived by his long-term partner, and by his ex-wife and son.The South African singer songwriter Valiant Swart wrote the song "Sonvanger" dedicated to the artist with Kerkorrel's mother Anne in mind, longing for her lost son.


== Awards ==
1995 SAMA – Best Pop Music Performance for Cyanide in the Beefcake
1997 SAMA – Best Male Vocalist and Best Adult Contemporary Album: Afrikaans for Ge-trans-for-meer
2001 Geraas – Best pop album and Best adaptation for Die Ander Kant
2013 SAMA – Lifetime Achievement Award


== Discography ==
Eet Kreef (1989)
Bloudruk (1992)
Cyanide in the Beefcake (1994)
Ge-trans-for-meer (1996)
Tien Jaar Later (1998)
Sing Koos du Plessis (1999)
Die Ander Kant (2000)
Voëlvry Die Toer (2002)
Kerkorrel – Best Of: Pêrels Voor Die Swyne (2003)
Hoe Ek Voel (2012) – issued to commemorate the 10 year anniversary of Rabie's death


== Tributes ==
After Rabie's death, several artists recorded tribute songs to his life and work. An incomplete list follows:

Stef Bos – Pelgrimsrus
Riku Lätti – Ysbeer
Amanda Strydom – Ek Het Gedroom
Karen Zoid – Foto Teen Die Muur
Jak De Priester – Kerkorrel
Kristoe Strauss – Sit Dit Self Af
Jan Blohm – Johnny K
Valiant Swart - Sonvanger
Valiant Swart en Koos Kombuis – Kleinmond Koebaai
Koos Kombuis - Johnny is nie dood nie


== Covers ==
Rabie is a much covered artist. Among the cover versions that exist are: 

Stef Bos – Hillbrow
Riku Lätti – Somer
Amanda Strydom – Hoe Ek Voel and Halala Afrika
Van Coke Kartel - Energie
af:Refentse Morake - Halala Afrika


== Legacy ==
The film Johnny is nie dood nie portrays a fictional group of friends meeting up after his suicide, looking back to the events leading up to the Voëlvry movement, and how his music inspired and influenced them.


== See also ==
Bernoldus Niemand
Koos Kombuis


== References ==


== Further reading ==