Carly Paradis is a Canadian-born British composer, songwriter and pianist. She composes soundtracks for movies, documentaries, TV series and her own albums. In 2007, she worked with film composer Clint Mansell. She arranged piano parts on Mansell's soundtrack for the BAFTA Award-winning film Moon, directed by Duncan Jones, and played all piano on the official score and soundtrack. She currently lives in London and is married to Northern Irish radio presenter Colin Murray.


== Film and television scoring ==
Paradis scored The Innocents in 2018 on Netflix. She composed the theme to BBC's drama Line of Duty, the ITV prequel series Prime Suspect 1973 and Sky One comedy Sick Note. She also composed a segment of the first female driven horror anthology XX which premiered at Sundance Film Festival 2017. She worked alongside Clint Mansell, arranging piano in the 2009 feature film The Rebound starring Catherine Zeta-Jones.  She composed the Steven Seagal 2011–2012 television series True Justice and film Deadly Crossing. In documentary television, in 2010 Paradis composed the score to the BBC Two documentary Davis v Taylor: The '85 Black Ball Final, commemorating the 25th anniversary of the 1985 World Snooker Championship final which was hosted by her husband Colin Murray and The Venus Project online documentary entitled Paradise or Oblivion in 2012. Her music can be heard in such television programmes as One Tree Hill, Degrassi: The Next Generation, The Listener, Rookie Blue, and The Border.


== Performance ==
Paradis performed her Netflix original series suite to The Innocents at the BBC Proms 2019 Royal Albert Hall conducted by Robert Ames and performed by London Contemporary Orchestra. Paradis has performed piano and keyboard alongside noted film composer Clint Mansell and Sonus Quartet showcasing his works at the Gent Film Festival in Belgium, Tenerife International Film Festival in the Canary Islands, Union Chapel, Islington, Le Trianon (theatre) Paris, Barbican Centre London, Royal Festival Hall London, Royal Northern College of Music Manchester, National Concert Hall Dublin and Melbourne Recital Centre as part of the Melbourne Festival.
She was in a Canadian pop/rock duo called Oceanship from 2004 to 2009, managed by Mark Avsec. They toured China in 2006 to 2007, and performed at Canadian Music Week in 2009


== Albums ==
In April 2011 the mini album They Have Been Watching was released on iTunes.In November 2013 the debut album Hearts To Symphony was released on iTunes.
In 2014 the official Line of Duty TV series soundtrack was released on iTunes.
In November 2019 the album Nothing is Something was released on iTunes.


== Awards and Nominations ==
Royal Television Society NI original music score for Line of Duty series 4 nomination. Won a Hollywood Music in Media Award (HMMA) for original song in Netflix Original The Innocents. She won silver Promax Awards for her The Story of God with Morgan Freeman trailer music. Underwire Film Festival nomination for best score for short film Trial written and directed by The Brothers Lynch. Paradis was nominated for Piano / Keyboard Player of the Year in the Hamilton Music Awards 2009.


== Education ==
Paradis studied music and multimedia at McMaster University in Hamilton and did a third year exchange to McGill University in Montreal to study digital studio composition. She also has a bachelor of education from the University of Ottawa.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Carly Paradis at IMDb