Jonny "2 Bags" Wickersham (born May 26, 1967 [1]) is an American musician who is currently a guitarist for the Californian punk rock band Social Distortion. He joined Social Distortion after the death of founding member and longtime friend, Dennis Danell, in February 2000. Previously, he had been a guitarist for U.S. Bombs, The Cadillac Tramps (active
member until the end of the band in 2017), and Youth Brigade from Southern California.


== Career ==
He has been touring and recording with Social Distortion since the When the Angel's Sing Memorial Concert held in June 2000, which was held to benefit Dennis Danell's family. Wickersham also co-wrote "Angel's Wings", "Faithless" and "Nickels and Dimes" along with Mike Ness for Social Distortion's 2004 release Sex, Love and Rock 'n' Roll as well as  "Machine Gun Blues", "Far Side of Nowhere" and "Take Care of Yourself"  with Mike Ness on Social Distortion's latest release Hard Times and Nursery Rhymes.
In 2008, Wickersham was on tour with Mike Ness' solo band along with Social Distortion.
The Vandals wrote a song about him: "Johnny Twobags", released on their album Live Fast, Diarrhea.
In 2010 he re-united with his U.S. Bombs bandmates to tour with them in Europe and in the USA.
In 2012, he announced the release of his first solo 7" called "Hope Dies Hard," and forthcoming solo album Salvation Town.His limited edition 7", "Hope Dies Hard" released on December 4, 2012 through Folsom Records. The singles were sold at Social Distortion's House of Blues shows in December 2012. Only 500 copies were made.
His first solo album Salvation Town was released through Isotone Records on April 1, 2014. The first single, "One Foot In The Gutter", premiered on Rolling Stone. Wickersham has described the sound on Salvation Town as "americana," and noted in an interview that "There’s always been a real American roots thread throughout everything I’ve done, with Cadillac Tramps an Social Distortion especially even to some degree in the Bombs. I’ve always written a lot of ballads and things like that. I grew up around a lot of American music. My father played in bar bands. That’s how he raised me, playing music music in bars. So it seemed like a natural approach to me."


== Equipment ==
Jonny uses an assortment of Gibson guitars and a Fender Telecaster.  He has five Les Paul Juniors (a 1955 sunburst, 1957 TV, a double cut 1959 cherry red and two Gibson VOS Les Paul Juniors with Luther Lee P-90s), a 1954 Gibson Les Paul goldtop and a '52 Fender Blackguard Telecaster. He also goes acoustic with his 1947 Gibson J-45. Recently he has also been using a signature Jonny Two Bags guitar custom-made for him by Gabriel Currie of Echopark Guitars.
Wickersham uses Satellite Atom 36 watt amps through Marshall 1960TV 4x12s with Celestion Vintage 30 speakers.  He has been seen using many effects over the years including a Tubescreamer, a MXR GT-OD, a MXR Smart Gate, a MXR Micro Amp and a J Rockett Archer.  Currently Jonny uses a Boss TU-2 Tuner and a J Rockett Archer.


== Selected discography ==


== References ==