Miles Leonard is a British music industry executive and was Chairman of Parlophone & Warner Bros. Records UK. He has previously worked for Virgin Records, EMI Records, Roadrunner Records and been credited as signing and breaking artists including Gorillaz, Coldplay, Tinie Tempah, The Verve , Royal Blood, Lily Allen, Paul Weller, Stereophonics and for reviving the career of Kylie Minogue.


== Career ==
Leonard started his career as an NVQ level plumber before starting in the music industry as an A&R scout at Virgin Records in 1991. Within his first year at Virgin he signed the band The Verve. He then worked for Roadrunner Records before joining Parlophone in 1996.When Kylie Minogue signed to Parlophone in 1999, Leonard played a major role in reviving a career that lost direction and had reached a relatively low ebb in the UK while the artist was signed to Deconstruction Records. According to Leonard: "There was something there that hadn't been achieved by her last label, and I didn't think it really had anything to do with her. She was still very strong vocally, and still definitely a star. I believed in her as an artist and I knew that with the right project, the right songwriters, the right producers, the right team, she would still have a fanbase out there."  Minogue's first single with Parlophone, "Spinning Around", saw the artist achieve her first UK #1 in ten years and heralded the start of a major career revival.
On 23 April 2008 Leonard was confirmed as the president of Parlophone. On 6 April 2011 EMI Music UK announced that it had appointed Leonard to the newly created position of "President of Parlophone & Virgin A&R Labels", where he will lead both Virgin and Parlophone's music discovery and development teams in the UK. In 2013 he became co-chairman of Warner Bros. Records UK.In 2012 he took the lease of the Ring O'Bells public house in Compton Martin jointly with Matt Fisher from the Butcombe Brewery.In 2013 he was appointed Chairman of Warner Bros. Records UK, following Warner Music Group's acquisition of Parlophone Label Group. In his tenor as Chairman of both Warner and Parlophone he signed artists such as Dua Lipa and Royal Blood. Miles received the highly coveted Music Week A&R Award twice and also received Live Music Business Awards 'Best Label Partner'. Miles was also Top 3 in Esquires Top 100 Most Influential People under 40 in its music section. Miles was #3 while Chris Martin was #2 and Robbie Williams #4
Phil Harvey (Coldplay Manager) said in an interview with Music Week, 'When in 2024, robots end up replacing humans throughout the music industry, the designers will probably base the prototype on Miles Leonard. Musically catholic with a predilection for funk, strong willed, creative, calm under pressure, fiercely loyal, tough as old boots and more than a little stubborn. Miles has been part of Coldplays inner circle since we signed to Parlophone in 1999 and he is still the man we want to most impress.'
Miles is credited as Executive Producer of the Pet shop Boys film 'A Life In Pop'.


== References ==