Alfonzo Blackwell is an American smooth jazz saxophonist, composer, and producer.


== Biography ==
Alfonzo Robert Blackwell Jr. was born in Brooklyn, New York. Music was always a big part of his household and childhood upbringing. He learned to play the piano by ear at the age of six. He began playing saxophone at the age of eleven and became proficient on alto, tenor, and soprano saxophones. Over the years he also started to play the drums, bass, and guitar.
He was accepted to the Performing Arts High School in New York City and continued his advanced studies at the Aaron Copland School of Music at Queens College and Five Towns College for Music in Long Island. His jazz influences included Cannonball Adderley, John Coltrane, Jackie McLean, Eric Dolphy and Charlie Parker. He performed at jazz clubs and earned a weekly residency at a Manhattan venue. Through his youth, Blackwell played in big bands, jazz ensembles, and funk bands to showcase original material, and he played traditional jazz standards and cover tunes. His formula for mixing traditional jazz with modern contemporary soul and jazz is what makes up his musical presence to date.
Blackwell entered the contemporary jazz music scene in May 1995 with his debut album Let's Imagine. "Hermina", a tribute to his mother, "Passion" and "Funky Shuffle" were chart toppers as well. Music video hits "Love No Limit" and "A Little Bit of Sax" were both nominated for Best Contemporary Jazz Video at Billboard Awards and he appeared on BET. His  compositions have been used for movie themes as well as television. He performed the theme song for the television show Baywatch Nights. He also was featured on the movie soundtrack for the Rebecca De Mornay and Antonio Banderas movie Never Talk to Strangers, with the hit track "Love Sick". Blackwell has performed with Gladys Knight, The Whispers, Roy Ayers, Mary J. Blige, Faith Evans, and Brian McKnight.
He recorded a version of George Benson's "Breezin'".


== Causes and special interests ==
Blackwell is a competitive bodybuilder and power-lifter. He is a competitive Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu practitioner and serves as a speaker and board member of the Artist Empowerment Coalition, a not-for-profit coalition of artists, musicians, songwriters, producers, and music fans. The AEC was initiated and inspired by Stevie Wonder, Prince, Roberta Flack, and Chaka Khan with the law firm of L. Londell McMillan and supports musicians' rights.


== Discography ==
Let’s Imagine (1995)
Alfonzo Blackwell (1996)
Body of Soul  (1998)
The Time Is Now (2000)
Reflections (2001)
Sax You Down (2004)
Dance to This (2008)
Legacy (2012)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site