Stephen "Steve" Hybicki (born 1980), professionally known as The Sauce, is an American audio engineer and record producer. Hybicki is known for engineering songs for major artists such as Future, Miley Cyrus, Candice Glover, Mariah Carey, Britney Spears and Lil Wayne.


== Career ==
Hybicki first started as a record producer in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, making beats and recording local artists until 2010, when he moved to Atlanta, Georgia after garnering some radio play for a song he produced in 2009 for local group Y.T.C. and singer Cincere. After two months of working on set as an extra for Tyler Perry's "Meet the Browns" movie, he accepted an internship at Hotbeats Recording Studios in Midtown Atlanta.
Having never went to school for engineering he had to learn by watching other engineers from Hotbeats and was mentored by KY Engineering (who is known as being an engineer for Lil Wayne, Waka Flocka Flame, and 2 Chainz) and Seth Firkins (who was Futures engineer until Firkins died in 2018). He learned quickly and within six months he was doing a large percentage of the recording sessions while still performing intern duties. He became the studio's first intern to be awarded a gold record by the RIAA for his engineering work on T.I.'s album No Mercy. The Sauce met Mike WiLL Made-It while interning at Hotbeats, and the two started collaborating.  
Mike appointed Hybicki after he left Hotbeats as his lead audio engineer and signed him to his EarDrummers record label and Interscope Records, with roles as a record producer and songwriter as well. After a few years of being Mike's lead tracking engineer (recording and arranging songs for Future, Miley Cyrus, Mariah Carey, etc.) he moved on to becoming a mix engineer for Mike's imprint through Interscope Records, Eardruma Records. Eardruma Record's first act was the multi platinum duo Rae Sremmurd, and Hybicki was credited as a composer, mix engineer, and recording engineer on their debut album Sremm Life. Sremm Life had five songs enter the Billboard Hot 100 and included the triple platinum “No Type”. Hybicki went on to mix other top 40 singles such as “Rake It Up” by Yo Gotti and Nicki Minaj, as well as “Fall” from Eminem's Kamikaze album. In addition to mixing and recording many #1 singles, he also executive produced Mike Will's album Ransom 2 which featured Lil Wayne, Pharrell, Chief Keef, Quayvo, Kendrick Lamar, Gucci Mane and others. Hybicki has also produced or co produced songs for Katy Perry, Trouble, Rae Sremmurd, and others.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Stephen Hybicki". Discogs.com. Retrieved 28 January 2021.