Rene Vasquez (born November 5, 1968), who goes by the stage name Peace 586 and formerly MC Peace, is an American Christian hip-hop producer and MC whose career has spanned the period from the 1980s to the present. A beatmaker who also has rapped, he's made a mark with his signature, sample-based production style and down-to-earth lyrical content—best known for expressing his Christian faith as it relates to life here now, as well as that to be gained. His name is derived from the month and year that he became a Christian: May 1986.


== Music career ==


=== Overview ===
Peace 586 was first known as "MC Peace" in the late 1980s, while recording with J.C. and the Boyz. Freedom of Soul was formed later—a partnership with DJ Cartoon (Victor Everett) that resulted in two albums (Caught in a Land of Time and The 2nd Comin') and considerable attention in the early 90s. The development of Freedom of Soul’s fan base was helped by affiliation with other popular Christian hip-hop artists at the time, including SFC (Soldiers for Christ), Dynamic Twins, and I.D.O.L. King. Peace would eventually follow other pursuits in the mid-90s, making way for more collaboration with MCs Theory & Jurny of LPG, producing their landmark album The Earthworm (1994), and becoming a member of the Tunnel Rats crew.
From that time on he produced for the Tunnel Rats, along with his own solo projects starting with The Risen Son (1996). After a number of years, a new album was released on Sphereofhiphop (and later re-released on Uprok Records), simply titled 586 (2001). A markedly less-collaborative effort than his initial solo offering, which heavily featured the Tunnel Rats, 586 is said to have been largely produced and recorded in five days—an impressive feat to yield any collection of substantial songs. Generations (2003) was thought to be a retirement album from rap, and saw a reunion with musical peers from early on. 2009’s re-entry album heAr (2009) marked a significant turn in his artistry, as it was the first in a series of instrumental beat tapes to feature guest vocals by other MCs, with no rhymes from the artist himself. 2010 saw the release of heAr’s successor, aBle. aBle featured two songs ("The Battery" and "Children") that were indicative of a new recording project to be officially announced in February 2011, with Peace 586 on the beats and Jurny Big on the rhymes—together known as The Battery.


=== Collaborators ===
Peace has worked and/or collaborated with many artists throughout his career. Among those are Ahmad (4th Avenue Jones’), Anointed (produced by Mario Winans), Ajax Starglider, Brainwash Projects, B-Twice, Clever MC, Crystal Lewis, Dert, Dynamic Twins, Gene Eugene, Freestyle Fellowship, Future Shock, I.D.O.L. King, The Innernationals, Jon Gibson, Jurny Big, LPG, Mass Reality, New Breed, P.I.D., Pigeon John, Propaganda, Raphi, RationaL, Remnant, Saturday Night Freestyle, Sev Statik, SFC, Sir Rocdomz, Sojourn, Soup the Chemist, T-Bone, and Zane.


== External links ==
Official page on Illect.com
Holy Hip-Hop Database entry


== References ==