Usman Warsi (Urdu:  عثمان وارثی) (born September 23, 1972 in Lahore, Pakistan) is a singer, a poet, a music director, and a composer.


== Early life and education ==
Usman Warsi was born into the family of Alhaaj Muhammad Sharf ud Din Ahmad known as Sufi Warsi (Urdu: صوفی وارثی). His family were landlords in Meerut. Sufi Warsi (his grandfather) was a scholar of Islam and poet. Usman Warsi is a nephew of Muzaffar Warsi who was an internationally-known poet. Usman completed his studies in 1999 in Lahore.


== Music ==
Usman's song "Yeh Mera Dil" was aired from all the major channels of Pakistan in 2003 i.e. PTV, PTV Prime and some private channels. His interview was aired from ATN Canada and PTV Prime UK channels. There are many articles about Usman's work in the newspapers of Pakistan, i.e. The Daily Nawa-i-Waqt and Daily Mashriq:

Interview published in Daily Mashriq on January 25, 1991.
Usman joined Sayyed Noor's company Paragon as music director and composer on January 1, 2000.
Popularity of his song "Yeh Mera Dil", Nawa-i-Waqt, March 2, 2003.
About making of song videos with all actors from UK and Canada, Nawa-i-Waqt, January 21, 2003.
Background music of the drama Gaddagar given by Usman Warsi and directed by Rukhsana Noor (film director), Nawa-i-Waqt, May 11, 2004.
About making of song videos and their release before Basant festival in the daily Nawa-i-Waqt, January 26, 2003.
About the making of Trust School in Lahore. Nawa-i-Waqt, June 3, 2003.Usman, in his childhood, took part in a music program called Hum Kalliyaan Hum Tare produced by Khalil Ahmed and aired by the Pakistan Television Corporation as a singer and got an award. He has created backgrounds for TV serials and has written and composed many songs in his 18 year long carrer as a composer and arranger.


== Personal life ==
Usman got married in 1999 in Lahore. He has one son, named Muhammad Rayyan Usman, and one daughter, named Seemal Usman. He worked in Dubai between 2006 and 2010 and he now lives in Saudi Arabia.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website