Tommy Sims  is an American bassist, songwriter, record producer, and bandleader.


== Music career ==
From 1987 to 1989 he was the bassist of the popular Christian rock band White Heart which he left to become a studio musician and producer. During 1992-1993, he played bass on the Bruce Springsteen and the "Other Band" Tour. He is also a songwriter, who  co-wrote Eric Clapton's "Change the World" which won the Grammy Award for Song of the Year in 1997. Other songs of his have been recorded by Bonnie Raitt, Susan Tedeschi, Garth Brooks, Cher, BlackStreet, Toni Braxton and BabyFace among others. Sims has also worked with Michael Bolton, Amy Grant, Kelly Clarkson, Carman, CeCe Winans, Israel Houghton, Michael W. Smith, The Neville Brothers, Michelle Williams of Destiny's Child, Brian Courtney Wilson and others.


== Television and film contributions ==
In addition to writing and producing, Sims also released a solo album in August 2000 entitled Peace and Love. A song from this release, "It Don't Matter to the Sun", was featured on the soundtrack of the hit television drama Grey's Anatomy. Sims' film contributions include Bruce Springsteen's recording "Streets of Philadelphia" which appeared in the Tom Hanks film Philadelphia, widely regarded as the first major film to deal openly with subject of AIDS and gay rights. The film and the song also went on to be heavy recognized at the following year's Academy Awards garnering several "Oscars" including the Best Song trophy. Sims' "Change The World was also featured in John Travolta's film Phenomenon and while winning the Grammy Award for Song Of The Year was rendered ineligible for nomination at that year's Academy Awards because of its prior release by Wynonna Judd. Sims has gone on to have his songs featured in several other blockbuster films including Kevin Costner's For Love Of The Game and Natalie Portman and Ashley Judd's Where the Heart Is. Cameo appearance as himself in Down Under the Big Top, a short film from 1996 by the Newsboys.


== Notable projects ==
Amy Grant - Heart in Motion, House of Love, Behind the Eyes
Carman - "The Standard" (1993), "R.I.O.T. (Righteous Invasion of Truth)" (1996)
Bruce Springsteen - In Concert/MTV Plugged, "Streets Of Philadelphia"
Garth Brooks - The Life of Chris Gaines, "Retrospective"
Michael McDonald - Blue Obsession
Kenny Loggins - It's About Time
BlackStreet - Another Level
Toni Braxton - The Heat
Robert Randolph and the Family Band - "ColorBlind"
Taylor Swift - Speak Now
Rachael Lampa - Rachael Lampa
Bonnie Raitt - "Silver Lining", "Souls Alike", "I Can't Help You Now"
Kelly Clarkson - Thankful
Newsboys - Shine: The Hits
Taylor Dayne - Naked Without You
Natalie Grant - Deeper Life
Michelle Williams - Do You Know
Marvin Winans - Alone But Not Alone
Darwin Hobbs - Worshipper - Broken - Vertical
Israel and New Breed - Real, "The Power of One"
Jonny Lang - "Fight for My Soul" (2013)
Brian Courtney Wilson - "Just Love"
Cece Winans - Let Them Fall in Love, "You Will"


== Discography ==
Peace and Love - released August 15, 2000 by Universal Motown Records, a division of UMG Recordings, Inc.

Which Way (Intro)
100
New Jam
When You Go
Summer
Write One
Alone
The Way It Used to Be
Comin' Home
The Ballad of Sophie
It Don't Matter
Love's Patience
Peace and Love
Which Way


== References ==


== External links ==
Tommy Sims on Soul Walking