Ronald Joseph Radke (; born December 15, 1983) is an American singer, songwriter, rapper, musician, record producer and convicted felon best known for being the current lead singer of Falling in Reverse and the former lead singer of Escape the Fate.Radke rose to popularity as the lead singer for post-hardcore band Escape the Fate, but was kicked out in 2008 after being sentenced to prison for violating probation related to his involvement in a 2006 killing. After his release, Radke started a new band, Falling in Reverse, and became its lead singer.
As a solo musician, Radke released a rap mixtape, Watch Me, in 2014, which included collaborations with Deuce, b.LaY, Tyler Carter, Sy Ari Da Kid, Jacoby Shaddix, Danny Worsnop, Andy Biersack, and Craig Mabbitt.


== Early life ==
Ronald Joseph Radke was born on December 15, 1983, in St. Rose Hospital, in Las Vegas, Nevada, one of three children born to Russell Radke, the others being his brothers, Anthony James Radke (1980-2013) and Matthew Radke. Radke's mother abused drugs and was absent from his childhood, which he said caused him to have a general lack of respect towards women as an adult although he later forgave her when he posted a picture of her on Instagram after a Falling in Reverse show in 2014. Radke is part Blackfoot Indian and Portuguese.Radke learned to play piano and guitar in his first bands. He began by playing Blink-182 songs on guitar. The first song he could play was "Dammit". He formed several bands while in high school. Radke ran away from home to play in his first band, with his friend Mitch, called 3.0. which according to Radke "sounded exactly like Blink 182". He lived with Mitch and his mother for a time. They played a few shows at various venues such as Chain Reaction and the Huntridge in Las Vegas. After the band, Radke moved back in with his dad, re-entered school, and dropped out again. He stated in an Alternative Press interview, "I just couldn't for some reason pay attention; I just daydreamed about everything else but what I'm supposed to be doing." Radke stated that the second band that he was in was called Lefty. Radke met Max Green (from the band Almost Heroes) at a talent show. Radke's microphone fell and Max picked it up for him while they were on stage and they became friends, forming the band True Story, which recorded a demo containing the track "This Is Not the End". Radke started screaming in the band after being inspired by Thrice, then started to sing, slowly forming Escape the Fate.
"Listen Up!" was written by Radke in 1998 as well as "Besides the Issues" and "The Worst Time". In 2001, Radke, with his friend, producer Michael "Elvis" Baskette, recorded the songs "Listen Up!", "The Worst Time" and "The Departure". Both recorded instruments together and also composed the themes for "As You're Falling Down", "Make Up" and "Not Good Enough for Truth in Cliche", recorded in 2005, along with Escape the Fate.


== History ==


=== Escape the Fate (2004–2008) ===
In high school, Radke and Max Green were close friends. In 2004, Bryan Money, looking for a vocalist, contacted Max who referred him to Radke. Bryan agreed and began auditions for a drummer. Robert Ortiz was selected, and Escape the Fate was formed. A few weeks later, Omar Espinosa, who at the time was the guitarist for Lovehatehero, joined as rhythm guitarist. The band began to play in the post-hardcore scene in Las Vegas. During that time Carson Allen joined as keyboardist. The band recorded the demo Escape the Fate EP. They signed in early 2006 with Epitaph Records after winning a radio contest judged by My Chemical Romance, which launched their career.In May 2006, recording for the EP There's No Sympathy for the Dead began, as well as some songs from the debut album, Dying Is Your Latest Fashion. Both were produced by Radke's friend Michael "Elvis" Baskette. 
Radke was kicked out of Escape the Fate in 2008 after he was sentenced to two and a half years in prison for violating a probation sentence given to him for his involvement in the killing of an 18-year old. Radke had multiple previous brushes with the law due to prior narcotics offenses. He was replaced with former Blessthefall singer Craig Mabbitt.During Radke's incarceration, a feud grew between Radke and Mabbitt. Escape the Fate insulted Radke during live performances and Radke responded with vulgar posts on social media. When Mabbitt began dating Radke's ex-girlfriend, who had starred in an earlier Escape the Fate music video, Radke asked Mabbitt, "How does my dick taste??" on Myspace. In response to a heckler during an Escape the Fate show at 2009's Warped Tour, Mabbitt yelled, "You miss the old singer? He’s locked up in Nevada. Go suck his fucking cock."In 2014, Escape the Fate and Falling in Reverse co-headlined the "Bury the Hatchet" tour, signifying an end to the hostilities.


=== Falling in Reverse (2008–present) ===
While serving his sentence at High Desert State Prison, Radke wrote the first material for his upcoming band, which he described as "Norma Jean or Underoath with Katy Perry choruses." With the help of Nason Schoeffler, Radke formed Falling in Reverse, originally named From Behind these Walls. Upon his release from prison in December 2010, Radke announced his return to recording. Falling In Reverse released their first single "Raised by Wolves" in 2010, followed by the album The Drug in Me Is You which was released on July 26, 2011, through Epitaph Records.Falling in Reverse's first two albums reached the top 20 in the United States, and all four have charted in the top 40. The band's song "Popular Monster" became a No. 1 hit on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart in 2020, their first chart-topper.


=== Solo and Watch Me (2013–present) ===
On May 31, 2013, Radke launched his YouTube channel and released a solo song, "Fair-Weather Fans". The song is described as "a song Ronnie made dedicated to all the people who didn't believe in him." On June 1, he released a second song, called "What Up Earth?".In part 3 of his interview with Alternative Press, Radke stated that he is creating a rap mixtape, produced by Charles Massabo (Kallaghan Records) that will feature some well known rap artists, the mixtape will be released in December 2013 for free. The first single off that mixtape, "Blacklist", which features b.LaY, was released on July 5, 2013 on YouTube.A diss track titled "I Wash Cars" (also featuring b.LaY), which attacks Sumerian Records and its founder Ash Avildsen, Lorenzo "The Main Event" Antonucci, and electronicore band I See Stars, was leaked online. Ash and Lorenzo released a diss track in reply to "I Wash Cars" titled "When Ronnie Met Sally" attacking Radke. The feud between the two groups has since been resolved, and Radke is now on good terms with I See Stars, Sumerian Records, and Antonucci. On October 28, 2013, it was announced that Ronnie Radke and Craig Mabbit of Escape the Fate had made up and are now on good terms. Also the two mentioned their two bands will be touring together in early 2014.

In an interview with Loudwire, he has stated that he is in the process of making a rap mixtape, which according to Radke will include an artist on every song. He has also stated that the mixtape may be released for around Christmas. On Christmas Day, he revealed a website through which subscribers received a new song, "Destiny", from the mixtape, now titled Watch Me. The track-list was also revealed but some songs did not contain feature other artists like he originally claimed. As of 2021, 3 songs from the mixtape don't have official releases.


== Personal life ==
Radke has one daughter from his relationship with model Crissy Henderson. At one point, he became engaged to Henderson but their relationship ended in 2013, due to infidelity on his part.Radke has openly denounced religion due to its treatment of LGBT people, saying he felt bitter and found hypocrisy in that Christianity was initially discriminatory against gay people but became accepting of them later on.Radke's older brother, Anthony, died as the result of a traffic collision in 2013. By Anthony, Radke has one niece, Sabrina, and four nephews, Troy, Nathan, Joshua, and Dylan.Since late 2018, Radke has been in a relationship with Saraya Bevis, better known as former WWE wrestler Paige.


== Legal issues ==


=== Involvement in killing and prison sentence ===
On May 6, 2006, then 22-year-old Radke met with Marcel Colquitt near Shadow Ridge High School, at the north end of Decatur Boulevard, at approximately 2:30 PM to fight. Each man brought additional men to support them in the fight, with news reports placing the number of those involved at anywhere from six to eight individuals. During the fight, 22-year-old Chase Rader, a man who had accompanied Radke, shot 18-year-old Michael Allen Cook three times, killing him, as well as wounding another man, Colquitt's brother. Rader was arrested for and charged with murder but the district attorney declined to prosecute him, despite his confession, as it was determined Rader acted in self-defense.Radke and Colquitt were criminally charged for their involvement in Cook's death, although Colquitt committed suicide before he could stand trial. On January 18, 2008, Radke pleaded guilty to battery with substantial bodily harm in relation to Cook's death and subsequently was ordered to be placed on probation for five years, and he was ordered to pay $92,372 in restitution for the medical bills of Michael Colquitt. After Radke violated the terms of his probation, he was made to serve two and a half years in prison.Because of his criminal activity and prison sentence, Escape the Fate fired Radke. Craig Mabbitt, formerly of the band Blessthefall, replaced the imprisoned Radke.


=== Domestic violence arrest ===
On May 1, 2012, Radke was accused of striking his then-girlfriend, Sally Watts, and was subsequently arrested in Glendale, California on August 6, 2012, after he'd failed to make an appearance at any of the scheduled court hearings. He was officially charged with a misdemeanor count of corporal injury and misdemeanor false imprisonment by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. He was released on $30,000 bail. On May 14, 2014, Radke pleaded no contest to disturbance of the peace.


=== Six Flags assault arrest ===
On September 29, 2012, Radke was performing as part of Falling in Reverse for FestEVIL, a punk rock festival for Six Flags Great Adventure's Fright Fest event, when he threw three microphone stands into the audience at the close of a performance, injuring a 16-year-old girl, who was taken to the hospital, and a 24-year-old man, who was treated at the scene. Radke was charged with simple assault and aggravated assault and released on $25,000 bail. Radke publicly apologized for his actions, saying that his actions were not in anger and that he hadn't intended to hurt anyone. Six Flags subsequently decided to ban hard rock and heavy metal bands from performing at the park in the future.


=== Rape allegation and defamation lawsuit ===
On June 10, 2015, it was reported that Radke had been publicly accused of sexual assault by 25-year-old Katelynd "Kacee" Boswell, of Salt Lake City, Utah. Boswell alleged that Radke (with his bus driver present) had sexually assaulted her after Falling in Reverse's performance at Murray Theater on June 3, 2015. Though it was determined that Radke had contact with Boswell, police found no evidence that Radke or his entourage had assaulted Boswell as she'd claimed they did and an eyewitness reported that she was visibly intoxicated upon exiting Radke's vehicle. Radke subsequently filed a lawsuit against Boswell for defamation.


== Discography ==


=== With Falling in Reverse ===
Studio albums

The Drug in Me Is You (2011)
Fashionably Late (2013)
Just Like You (2015)
Coming Home (2017)Extended plays

Neon Zombie (2022)


=== With Escape the Fate ===
Studio albums

Dying Is Your Latest Fashion (2006)Extended plays

There's No Sympathy for the Dead (2006)Demos

Escape the Fate (2005)
Situations (2007)


=== Solo career ===
Mixtapes

Watch Me (2014)


==== Singles ====


==== Collaborations ====


== Accolades ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Ronnie Radke at Wikimedia Commons
Ronnie Radke on Facebook