Bae Su-ji (Korean: 배수지; born October 10, 1994), better known as Bae Suzy, is a South Korean singer, actress and model. She was a member of the girl group Miss A under JYP Entertainment. She made her debut as an actress with television series Dream High (2011) and has gone on to appear in series such as Gu Family Book (2013),  Uncontrollably Fond (2016), While You Were Sleeping (2017), Vagabond (2019) and Start Up (2020). She made her film debut in Architecture 101 (2012). Since her successful film debut, she has been hailed as "The Nation's First Love" in her home country.


== Early life ==
Bae was born in Buk District, Gwangju, South Korea on October 10, 1994, to Bae Wan-young and Jeong Hyun-sook. She has an older sister and a younger brother. She attended School of Performing Arts Seoul and graduated in 2013. Before debuting, she was an online shopping model.


== Career ==


=== 2009–2010: Debut with Miss A ===

In 2009, Bae auditioned for Mnet Superstar K and made it through the preliminary round but she was ultimately eliminated. However, she caught the attention of a scout from JYP Entertainment and soon became a trainee.In March 2010, Bae became a member of the formed group Miss A.


=== 2010–2016: Rising popularity ===
In October 2010, Bae became the fixed host for MBC Show! Music Core alongside Minho and Onew, both members of Shinee, and Jiyeon, of  T-ara. Bae later hosted other events such as the Seoul Music Awards, Golden Disc Awards, and Mnet 20's Choice Awards where she won an award under the category "Hot New Star of 2011".

Apart from her group activities, Bae also ventured into acting. She made her acting debut in the music teen drama Dream High, which aired on KBS from January 3 to February 28. She also released an OST for the drama, titled "Winter Child". The drama was a local success, earning high viewership ratings during its two-month run; and also gained popularity in other countries. At the KBS Drama Awards, Bae won the Best New Actress award as well as Best Couple award with co-star Kim Soo-hyun. Bae also became a cast member in KBS TV reality show Invincible Youth 2. The show began filming its first episode on October 19 and aired on November 11.Bae made her film debut with Architecture 101 (2012) playing the younger version of the female protagonist. Architecture 101 was one of the ten most-watched films in Korea in the first quarter of 2012, and achieved over 4.1 million admissions nine weeks after its theater release; a new box-office record set for Korean melodramas. The same year, Bae played a supporting role in KBS drama Big, written by the Hong sisters, alongside Gong Yoo and Lee Min-jung.Bae was the first Korean female celebrity to win a singer rookie award, drama rookie award, film rookie award, and variety rookie award. She received the Best New Actress award at the 48th Baeksang Arts Awards for her acting performance in Architecture 101. On December 22, 2012, Bae won the Best Newcomer award in the Variety category at the KBS Entertainment Awards for her stint in Invincible Youth 2 In 2013, she starred in the historical fusion drama Gu Family Book alongside Lee Seung-gi. She received acting recognition at the MBC Drama Awards, winning the Top Excellence award and at the Seoul International Drama Awards, winning the Outstanding Actress award. She also featured on the variety show Healing Camp, becoming the youngest guest on the show.In May 2014, Bae was cast in the film The Sound of a Flower (2015) as Jin Chae-sun, Korea's first female pansori singer. The film depicts the struggle of a singer who is not allowed to perform in the public because of her gender during the Joseon era. To prepare herself for the role, Bae received training in pansori for a year. The same year, she collaborated with Taiwanese singer-actor Show Lo in the single "Together In Love", featured in his album Reality Show.

In January 2016, Bae released a digital single titled "Dream" in collaboration with Exo's Baekhyun. The song debuted at number one on Gaon's weekly digital chart and proceeded to win the "Best Collaboration" award at the Mnet Asian Music Awards. She then starred in the romance melodrama Uncontrollably Fond with Kim Woo-bin. Bae released two OSTs for the drama, including a self-composed song. In September 2016, Bae's wax figure at Madame Tussauds Hong Kong went on display. She is the first Korean female celebrity to receive a wax-likeness of herself at Madame Tussauds.


=== 2017–present: Solo debut and new agency ===
In early 2017, Bae made her debut as a solo artist with the album titled Yes? No?. Her pre-release single "Pretend" was released on January 17 and achieved an all-kill on music charts. The title track, "Yes, No, Maybe" was released a week after, on January 24, 2017. In February 2017, Bae released a duet with singer Park Won, titled "Don't Wait for Your Love".
She then returned to television, starring alongside Lee Jong-suk in the fantasy thriller drama While You Were Sleeping, which premiered in September 2017.
On December 27, following the announcement of Min's departure, JYP Entertainment announced that Miss A had disbanded. Bae renewed her contract with JYP Entertainment.On January 22, Bae released her pre-release track entitled "In Love with Someone Else", which achieved a real-time all kill. 
Her second album, titled Faces of Love, was released on January 29, with the lead single "Holiday". On February 14, the music video for her b-side track, "Sober", was released. On March 9, Bae released her fourth music video for the single "Midnight", featuring a piano ensemble by Yiruma.On March 31, 2019, Bae left JYP Entertainment following the expiration of her contract. She then signed a contract with acting agency Management SOOP. She then starred in the spy-action drama Vagabond, playing a secret agent;  and action film Ashfall, playing the role of Ha Jung-woo's wife.In 2020, Bae starred in the drama Start Up as an aspiring  entrepreneur. The story tells about a woman, played by her, who dreams of becoming Korea's Steve Jobs by starting a start-up.In February 17, 2022, Bae will make her comeback as a singer after 4 years with the song entitled "Satellite".


== In the media ==
Bae became one of the most in-demand endorsers in South Korea, and has been hailed as a "CF Queen" due to numerous endorsement deals ranging from cosmetics, apparel, up to basic commodities like sugar. She made more than 10 billion won in 2013 with more than 14 endorsement deals in one year. In 2020, Bae was nicknamed "Human Dior" as fans noticed her always wearing and promoting the brand.


== Discography ==


=== Extended plays ===
Yes? No? (2017)
Faces of Love (2018)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Bae Suzy at IMDb
Bae Suzy at HanCinema 
Bae Suzy at Management SOOP (in English)