Jennifer Blakeman is a musician and music industry executive. Blakeman was a keyboardist for multiple bands predominantly in the 80s and 90s, before starting a career in the Music Publishing industry.


== Musical career ==
Blakeman started her musical career as a founding member of the band Private Life, a hard rock formation produced by both Ted Templeman, and Eddie Van Halen and released two albums with this band, Shadows (1988) and Private Life (1990). Later Blakeman worked as a touring keyboardist for British rock artist Billy Idol, the Australian pop rock band Savage Garden (most notably on the Affirmation album), British pop artist Billie Myers, American icon David Cassidy, and many other artists.


== Business career ==
She became an executive at Cherry Entertainment Group, Atlantic Records, Universal Pictures, Universal Music Group, and later Zomba Publishing. After the purchase of Zomba by Universal Music Publishing Blakeman continued working with the company as the Senior Vice President of Creative Affairs. In this function she was responsible for the publishing of artists including Justin Timberlake, Ne-Yo, Skylar Grey, T-Pain, Anthony Hamilton and Linkin Park. She co-founded Atlas Music Publishing Group where she served as Chief Creative Officer, overseeing a roster of top writers whose songs have been recorded by John Legend, Kelly Clarkson, Beyonce, Miley, Sam Hunt, and hundreds of others. In 2018 she formed one77 Music, a boutique creative-focused music publishing company based in New York City where her clients include Sean "The Pen" Garrett; producers, Mike & Keys; artists Alex Winston and Secret Weapon; the catalog of Al Jackson Jr and jvs with Chris Farren's Nashville-based indie pub co, Combustion Music and Atlanta-based, Chris Jones of Stateline Entertainment among others.She is an adjunct professor of music publishing at New York University.  After serving as president of The Recording Academy's New York chapter board from 2010-12, she was elected to serve four years as trustee on the national board of The Recording Academy, and was most recently re-elected to serve as president of the New York chapter board.


== See also ==
National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences
Zomba Group of Companies
Universal Music Publishing Group


== References ==


== External links ==
Jennifer Blakeman at IMDb