Rhona Lynn Bennett (born May 10, 1976), also known as Miss R&B, is an American singer, actress and model best known for her recurring role as Nicole on The Jamie Foxx Show. She is currently a member of contemporary R&B female group En Vogue. Bennett began her career doing voiceovers and industrial films before moving into professional theatre and television. Before joining the cast of The Jamie Foxx Show, Rhona was a castmember of the Disney Channel's variety show The All-New Mickey Mouse Club. She is a member of Zeta Phi Beta sorority. She also appeared as Loquatia on the short-lived UPN television sitcom Homeboys in Outer Space during the 1996–97 season.


== Career ==
She started in music at 11 years of age with ETA Creative Arts Theater, and sang "Christmas Melody" in Goodman Theater.
In 1991, Bennett became a Mouseketeer on the '90s revival of The Mickey Mouse Club. She was also part of a spin-off dramedy titled "Emerald Cove" on The Disney Channel. After the show was cancelled in 1994, Bennett moved to California to continue her career as an actress, landing appearances on several shows, including Living Single and Martin. She also garnered a regular role in the mid-1990s, playing Loquatia on the sitcom Homeboys in Outer Space.
In early 2000, Bennett had a minor role on the WB sitcom The Jamie Foxx Show, in which she played Nicole, Jamie's co-worker and singing partner.
Shortly after, in late 2000, Bennett signed with Epic/Sony Records under producer Rodney "Darkchild" Jerkins' imprint Darkchild Records, where she was given the title First Lady of Darkchild. Her first single Satisfied, released in March 2001, shipped gold to Japan. It also became a US Hot Dance Club Play hit the following month. In June 2001, her self-titled album was given a limited release in the US, Japan and Europe. Consequently, the album did not chart and Bennett was soon dropped from the label, making Rhona her sole album.
Bennett landed a leading role in the stage play "Men Cry in the Dark" in 2002.
In 2003, Bennett joined En Vogue for a five-year tenure until leaving the group in 2008, due to the return of original member Dawn Robinson. Bennett also performed solo at the American Airlines Center on July 27, 2008, under the Miss R&B moniker, where she helped to raise funds for a new charity for the homeless. Bennett reunited with the members of En Vogue to perform at the American Music Festival on August 29, 2008.
In 2008, she began work for her second album entitled The Anticipation of R&B, releasing several promotional singles in support of the album and boasting collaborations with Brandy and En Vogue.  However, the album was shelved in 2010 due to internal conflicts and insufficient promotion.
In June 2012, Bennett rejoined the group En Vogue for their tour and upcoming projects.
She is active on social media outlets YouTube and Instagram, conducting online coaching sessions, and may possibly continue a solo career.


== Discography ==
Albums2001: Rhona (limited release)
2010: The Anticipation of R&B (unreleased)


=== Singles ===
as lead artist


== References ==


== External links ==
Rhona Bennett at IMDb