Last Dinosaurs are an Australian indie rock band from Brisbane, Queensland. The band consists of lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist Sean Caskey, lead guitarist Lachlan Caskey, bass guitarist Michael Sloane, and drummer Dan Koyama. Koyama and the Caskey brothers are all of Japanese descent, and the band have toured and frequently make visits to Japan.The band's debut EP Back from the Dead in 2010 and subsequent debut studio album In a Million Years in 2012 received critical praise by Australian media critics including the likes of Triple J, among others. The band is currently signed in Australia to independent label Dew Process, and in the UK are signed to Fiction Records. Internationally, Last Dinosaurs distributes through Universal Music Group.
On 28 August 2015, Last Dinosaurs released their second album Wellness. The album's release was preceded by singles "Evie" and "Apollo".
On 5 October 2018, the band released their third album, titled Yumeno Garden.
The band is named after the song "Last Dinosaur" by the Japanese rock band The Pillows.


== History ==


=== Formation and early days (2007–2009) ===
In 2007, frontman Sean Caskey and drummer Dan Koyama met during high school and developed a strong interest in music. Soon afterward, Sean's younger brother Lachlan joined the band as lead guitarist. Sam Gethin-Jones, who was already a talented drummer in the Brisbane music scene, tried his hand at bass and completed the original Last Dinosaurs quartet. Prior to Sam leaving the band in 2013, the Last Dinosaurs were 3/8 Japanese and 1/4 Jewish.


=== Early success and Back from the Dead (2009–2011) ===
After launching their debut extended-play in 2010, the band first found success after posting their demo to the Triple J Unearthed project. Not long after, they were interviewed by radio DJ Zan Rowe. Hit track "Honolulu" from Back from the Dead was placed on high rotation on national broadcaster Triple J, quickly gaining the band recognition in the music community. With their name popping up in music publications, blogs, and gaining fans through the airing of their songs on Triple J, the band was invited to play at mainstream music festivals including Splendour in the Grass, the Laneway Festival, the Falls Festival and Southbound, and have supported bands such as Foals, Matt & Kim, Lost Valentinos and Foster the People.


=== In a Million Years (2011–2013) ===
In early 2011 the band announced that they had been planning on recording their debut album after their "Back from the Dead" tour in mid-2010. In June 2011 the band started a Tumblr blog narrating their recording process for the album with producer Jean-Paul Fung at BJB Studios in Sydney, Australia. The album entitled as In a Million Years was released on 2 March 2012. The album made an Australian Top 10 Debut and managed to get to number 8 on the Australian Albums Chart and number 2 on the digital album charts. The band completed the sold out Million Years national tour, with multiple shows in many cities due to ticket demand. The band then completed a tour of the UK and Europe, and later released the album in the UK in September 2012.


=== Wellness (2013–2018) ===
After the release of their debut album in 2012, Last Dinosaurs experienced a number of changes that have not affected the band in any significant way. Despite these changes however, various new opportunities for the band arose through 2013 and 2014, and Last Dinosaurs continued with plans to release a follow-up album to In a Million Years.
On 23 July 2013, Sam Gethin-Jones posted a statement on the band's Facebook page formally announcing that he was leaving the band. "For the band to move forward in the strongest way possible it is best that we part ways now," he said. Although he did not give a clear explanation as to why he was leaving, he ensured fans that he wasn't leaving music altogether, and his departure was the start of a "different pathway [for him] to follow." He thanked fans, and assured that there was no bad blood between the four.
On 13 October 2013, Last Dinosaurs officially announced through Twitter that the band had begun writing their second album.As a result of Gethin-Jones' departure from Last Dinosaurs, the band had lost its bass guitarist, leaving a major gap in the quartet's lineup. Beginning with Last Dinosaurs' South African tour in September 2013, Michael Sloane toured with the band substituting as bass player and providing backing vocals. A friend of the band, Sloane was the band's original bassist and had previously worked with the band numerous times directing the music videos for "Zoom", "Time and Place", and "Andy". On 28 January 2014, Last Dinosaurs officially announced that after four months of being with the band, Michael had officially returned and joined on as bassist.After a several months-long break from touring internationally through South Africa and Asia, Last Dinosaurs completed writing for their next album and were finally ready to record. In late November and early December 2014, Last Dinosaurs announced via Facebook and Twitter that the band was set to commence recording of their unnamed new album on 3 December 2014. As of 20 March 2015, Last Dinosaurs were working on Wellness at The Grove Studios near Gosford, New South Wales. The band posted photos and updates to social media and their website through the production process.
In response to a question via Twitter, Last Dinosaurs' manager noted on 7 April 2015 that the band's first single from their upcoming album would be tentatively released in about five weeks; indicating a May 2015 release.On 1 May 2015, Last Dinosaurs released "Evie", the first single from their upcoming second album Wellness. "Evie" was premiered by Linda Marigliano on Triple J's "Good Nights" program on 30 April 2015.
The second single "Apollo" was also premiered by Marigliano on Triple J's Good Nights program on 15 July 2015 along with the announcement of Last Dinosaurs' second album Wellness.
Wellness was released internationally on 28 August 2015. The album features all new songs except "Zero" and "Stream" which the band debuted live while touring in 2013. Wellness debuted at number 18 in the Australian ARIA Charts, ten spots lower than In a Million Years reached.Last Dinosaurs then went on their Wellness tour, their first show being on 15 September 2015, and their final one being on 18 October 2015. They showcased their songs in the Wellness album on the tour.
The Last Dinosaurs also went on the Australia-exclusive tour, Miracle Methods. The tour brought them to Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, and Sydney.


=== "Dominos", "Eleven" and Yumeno Garden (2018–2019) ===
On 20 February 2018, Last Dinosaurs Released their first single accompanied by a music video, "Dominos", was the beginning of their new era. The video was captured at their release party for the single, expressing intense emotions with both the crowd and the band. They later released "Eleven" alongside "Dominos", on 4 July 2018. Soon after, a music video for "Eleven" was uploaded on 30 July 2018.
On 5 October 2018, the band's third album, Yumeno Garden, was released, having been preceded by the singles "Dominos" and "Eleven". There was an album launch party held that night, where Last Dinosaurs showcased their brand new album. This third album was the band's first ever full creation that was entirely do-it-yourself, as they took it upon themselves to write, mix, and produce the songs single-handedly.
On 24 April 2019, Last Dinosaurs announced a European tour, playing them in late November. Shortly after completing their first USA tour in the spring, they announced that they would be returning to more U.S. cities in October/November 2019.


=== "FMU", "Flying", "Collect Call" and upcoming fourth album (2019–present) ===
On 30 September 2019, Last Dinosaurs released a new single titled "FMU" just before they left to embark on their lengthy US/EU tour. This song was premiered on Triple J's "Good Nights" show, with Ebony Boadu. It has been spoken of several times in interviews that the meaning of the song's lyrics relates back to the tense relationship between Hong Kong and China.
On 17 April 2020, the band released another single titled "Flying" that had originally been a demo on Lachlan's SoundCloud. The song is a departure from their usual indie rock catalogue and gears more towards house music and nu-disco. The band announced through Instagram the following year that their fourth album had been completed.
On February 11, 2022, the band released another single titled "Collect Call".


== Band members ==


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


== Singles ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website