Bill Callahan (born June 3, 1966) is an American singer-songwriter and guitarist who has also recorded and performed under the band name Smog. Callahan began working in the lo-fi genre of underground rock, with home-made tape-albums recorded on four-track tape recorders. Later he began releasing albums with the label Drag City, to which he remains signed today.


== Career ==
Callahan started out as a highly experimental artist, using substandard instruments and recording equipment. His early songs often nearly lacked melodic structure and were clumsily played on poorly tuned guitars, resulting in the dissonant sounds on his self-released cassettes and debut album Sewn to the Sky. Much of his early output was instrumental, a stark contrast to the lyrical focus of his later work. His use of lo-fi techniques was not primarily an aesthetic preference, but stemmed from his lack of resources to make and record music. Once he signed a contract with Drag City, he started to use recording studios and a greater variety of instruments for his records.
From 1993 to 2000, Callahan's recordings grew more and more "professional" sounding, with more instruments, and a higher sound quality. In this period he recorded two albums with the influential producer Jim O'Rourke and Tortoise's John McEntire, and collaborated with Neil Hagerty. Callahan also worked closely with his then-girlfriend Cynthia Dall in his early career, and they contributed vocals to each other's albums. After 2000's Dongs of Sevotion, Callahan began moving back to a slightly simpler instrumentation and recording style, while retaining the more consistent songwriting style he had developed over the years. This shift is apparent in albums such as Rain on Lens, Supper, and A River Ain't Too Much to Love.
Smog's songs are often based on simple, repetitive structures, consisting of a simple chord progression repeated for the duration of the entire song. His singing is characterized by his baritone voice. Melodically and lyrically he tends to eschew the verse-chorus approach favoured by many contemporary songwriters, preferring instead a more free-form approach relying less on melodic and lyrical repetition. Themes in Callahan's lyrics include relationships, animals, relocation, nature, and more recently, politics. On the subject of voice in his albums, Callahan has said, "It's usually one character per record. So, the character appears in all or most of the songs on one record and then is gone. Though it makes me feel weird to talk about. Because I don't really think in clear terms of characters. My albums as a whole could be seen as one character with many voices." His generally dispassionate delivery of lyrics and dark irony often obfuscate complex emotional and lyrical twists and turns. Critics have generally characterized his music as depressing and intensely introverted, with one critic describing it as "a peep-show view into an insular world of alienation."Cat Power (Chan Marshall) recorded Callahan's song "Bathysphere" on her 1996 album What Would the Community Think and also covered another Callahan song, "Red Apples", on her Covers Record, released in 2000.
In 2007, Callahan released Woke on a Whaleheart, his first solo album released under his own name. Sometimes I Wish We Were an Eagle followed in April 2009. Both recordings were released through Drag City, worldwide. In 2009, Callahan contributed cover songs on four separate tribute albums to Judee Sill, Kath Bloom, Chris Knox, and Merge Records. In 2010, he released his first live album Rough Travel for a Rare Thing, which was recorded in 2007 at The Toff in Melbourne, Australia.  Apocalypse, was released in April 2011 to favorable reviews.  Critic Sasha Frere-Jones called it "my favorite of Callahan's albums, not because it has better songs—those are scattered among at least five others – but because it does exactly what he wants it to do: it conveys an album’s coherence." A tour film chronicling Callahan's 2011 Apocalypse tour was released in 2012.
His followup to Apocalypse, Dream River, was released in September 2013. In 2018, Callahan was featured in the Live at Third Man Records series. This was his second live album, and features songs from Callahan's previous three studio albums.Callahan's most recent album, Shepherd in a Sheepskin Vest, was released on June 14, 2019. It received favourable reviews, with Pitchfork contributing editor Jayson Greene referring to it as a "highlight of his career".His song "Drover" features prominently in the final episode of the documentary series Wild Wild Country, the title of which is drawn from the song's chorus. His song "America" also plays during the credits of Episode 1.His cover of Kath Bloom's "The Breeze/My Baby Cries" is featured in the fifth episode of the third series of Sex Education. 


== Personal life ==
Though he was born in Maryland, Callahan's family spent a total of eight years living in Knaresborough in England's North Riding of Yorkshire, with a four-year return to Maryland from 1969 to 1973. His parents worked as language analysts for the National Security Agency.Callahan previously dated other high-profile musicians Cynthia Dall, Cat Power, and Joanna Newsom. In 2013, he became engaged to photographer and filmmaker Hanly Banks; they were married the next year. Their son, Bass, was born in March 2015.


== Books ==
In July 2010 Drag City published Callahan's Letters to Emma Bowlcut, an epistolary novel.
A book of photographs of Callahan by Chris Taylor, titled The Life and Times of William Callahan, was released in January 2013.In October 2014, a collection of ink drawings by Callahan and lyrics spanning his first album as Smog, to Dream River was released, titled I Drive a Valence.


== Discography ==


=== As Smog ===
Sewn to the Sky (1990)
Forgotten Foundation (1992)
Julius Caesar (1993)
Burning Kingdom (1994)
Wild Love (1995)
Kicking a Couple Around (1996)
The Doctor Came at Dawn (1996)
Red Apple Falls (1997)
Knock Knock (1999)
Dongs of Sevotion (2000)
Rain on Lens (2001)
Accumulation: None (2002)
Supper (2003)
A River Ain't Too Much to Love (2005)


=== As Bill Callahan ===
Woke on a Whaleheart (2007)
Sometimes I Wish We Were an Eagle (2009)
Apocalypse (2011)
Dream River (2013)
Have Fun with God (2014)
Shepherd in a Sheepskin Vest (2019)
Gold Record (2020)
Blind Date Party (2022) (with Bonnie "Prince" Billy)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Pitchfork Media's Shepherd in a Sheepskin Vest interview (2019)
Music Guide to Bill Callahan at pontone.pl
Bathysphere
The Other Journal interview (2007)
PopMatters interview (2005)
Bill Callahan at NPR Music
Daytrotter Session