Secret Agent 23 Skidoo (or SAS23) is a Grammy Award-winning family hip hop musician from Asheville, North Carolina. Secret Agent 23 Skidoo has been performing children's music since 2008. He was described on one occasion as being in the upper echelon of artists. He performs music in an unusual niche of rap for children.  His lyrics are child-appropriate.After a decade touring nationally as a rapper and producer in Granola Funk Express, and sharing the stage with the likes of Run DMC, Mos Def and P Funk, he released his first kid-hop album in 2008. He has been on the kindie rock scene ever since and has celebrated reviews and features on NPR’s All Things Considered and in Time Magazine, Parenting Magazine, Cookie, and USA Today and on kid-blogs including Zooglobble. His songs speak of dragons, blue grasshoppers and talking clouds and convey positive messages and simple life lessons through hip-hop. Both hip hop and storytelling artforms are presented masterfully. They transcend generations and put on family music concerts that kids, tweens, and their parents can all enjoy.Secret Agent 23 Skidoo serves as the official spokesman for the New York State Library System Children’s Summer Reading Program and is the 2010 and PSA spokesman for the US Library System's Collaborative Summer Library Program. He can be heard and seen in radio and TV commercials nationwide promoting summer reading programs at libraries. He has performed for kids in libraries and schools across the country, teaching meaningful art to the next generation through rap and poetry.Secret Agent 23 Skidoo actively contributes to social justice and positive change in the world. He generously applied his talent on projects such as "Many Hands: Family Music for Haiti" in response to the devastating earthquake there. Also "Science Fair", a compilation to support science and engineering education for girls, which won a Parents' Choice Award. In 2018, Skidoo contributed to Hold Tight, Shine Bright, an album to benefit detained immigrant children and at aid concerts such as the Camp Fire Benefit Jam to help his fellow Californians who were affected by the wildfire.


== Albums ==
He released two albums with Happiness Records, Easy (2008), and Underground Playground (2010). Secret Agent 23 Skidoo has had ten No. 1 radio hits on XM/Sirius Kids Place Live! and has played venues including Kidzapalooza, Austin Kiddie Limits, The Winnipeg Folk Festival, The Philadelphia Zoo, NYC's Irving Plaza and the Smithsonian Museum.
Easy, his debut album, encourages kids to be themselves, overcome fears, appreciate family, value healthy living, and above all else to “Have Fun”. On Underground Playground, he encourages kids to respect uniqueness and live life to the fullest. The album includes songs such as “Ride the Butterflies”, “Chase the Rain”, “The Whalelephant”. “Speak the Truth” features Gift of Gab. The national board of judges for Fids and Kamily poll named Underground Playground as #5 for Best Kids and Family Music of 2010.Make Believers was released in 2012 and continues to inspire listeners. Themes include curiosity, individuality, and that love is greater than fear. "Magic Beans" dives into the classic tale of Jack and the Beanstalk from a new perspective. "Hot Sauce" encourages kids to try new things, and "Gotta Be You" describes the importance of being the person you'd want to befriend. Last, "Back Home" touches every listener with a pet.
The Perfect Quirk was released in 2015 and was nominated for a Grammy Award. The album begins with "You're It", a song with funky rhythms and truisms no one can deny. "Imaginary Friend" introduces a unique character and mind-opening perspectives, and is the inspiration for an animated film. "Pillowfort Pillowfight" is every kid's anthem.
Infinity Plus One was released in 2017, was nominated and won a Grammy Award for Best Children's Album. In addition to its spacey vibe, the album includes actual astronomical elements, such as the electromagnetic emanations of Earth, which were recorded by the Voyager spacecraft in 1977.Wake Up The Dream was released in 2018. Listeners rave about the track Makeshift Spaceship and its funky video.


== Books ==
What's It Like In The Stars (2007)
Weirdo Calhoun and the Odd Men Out (2015)
Word Is Born (2021)


== Awards ==
At the 59th Grammy Awards, Secret Agent 23 Skidoo was awarded a Grammy for Best Children's Album for his record Infinity Plus One. At the 57th Grammy awards, his record, The Perfect Quirk was nominated for Best Children's Album.2014 Moonbeam Awards - Weirdo Calhoun and the Odd Men Out (Silver)


== Discography ==
2008 Easy
2010 Underground Playground
2012 Make Believers
2014 The Perfect Quirk
2016 Infinity Plus One
2017 Mozartistic (with Asheville Symphony Orchestra)
2018 Wake Up the Dream
2020 The Figments of Polyglot: Mixtapes 1-12
2021 The Beat Bach Symphonies (with Asheville Symphony Orchestra)


== Collaborations ==


=== Albums ===
2010 Many Hands: Family Music for Haiti
2011 All About Bullies, Big and Small
2012 Science Fair
2018 Hold Tight, Shine Bright


=== Songs ===
2011 – “Look Both Ways” with Egg
2011 – “Froggie Went A Courtin’” with Joanie Leeds and the Nightlights
2011 – “Cooperate” with Sugar Free Allstars
2014 – “Together” with Moona Luna
2014 – “You Are Beautiful” with Robbie Schaefer
2015 – “I <3 Ur Face” with Josh and the Jamtones
2018 – “Are You Afraid of the Dark?” with Lucy Kalantari and the Jazz Cats
2019 – “Rock This World”, with Mista Cookie Jar
2019 – “Shadow” with The Pop Ups
2019 – “Everybody’s Crazy” with Formidable Vegetable
2019 – “Leaders of the World” with Renee & Friends, Addi Rose and Amelia Dektor
2020 – “Laugh At Life” with Secret Agent Hi-Fi


== References ==