Patrick James Bianco (born February 26, 1981), better known as PJ Bianco, is an American songwriter, record producer and artist developer from New Jersey.
PJ is known for his early days development of The Jonas Brothers as the songwriter/producer behind their debut album & top 40 hit "When You Look Me In The Eyes" and most recently as a major collaborator of American band, A R I Z O N A.His recent notable songwriting/production credits include Avicii's "Hold The Line", A R I Z O N A's "Oceans Away", Axwell's "Nobody Else" and LP's "Into The Wild".


== Life and career ==


=== Childhood and youth ===
PJ was born in Bronxville, New York, but spent the majority of his youth in Ramsey, New Jersey. As a young man PJ was particularly influenced by his father, Pat Bianco, a professional saxophone player and member of the Walter Murphy Band, who sang on their songs "(You've Got to Be) Your Own Best Friend" and "Just a Love Song" from their album A Fifth of Beethoven.


=== Career Beginnings and Musical Background ===
PJ studied composition at the Conservatory of Music at SUNY at Purchase College in New York graduating with a BFA in Music. He grew as a producer, working and learning alongside classmates such as Langhorne Slim and Regina Spektor. In his final year, PJ gained first-hand knowledge of the music industry, interning, engineering and assisting for producers and mixers at Quad Recording Studio (Manhattan, NY) and The Loft Recording Studio(Bronxville, NY).  During his internship, he gained insight into the business from such producers and mixers as Carl Sturken and Evan Rogers (responsible for the launch of Rihanna), Kanye West, Eric Foster White, and Michael Brauer. Through his time composing, writing, and recording all genres of music, PJ developed a multi instrumentalist style that is like none other.


=== Producing, songwriting and recognition ===
After graduation, Bianco signed a deal with Denise Rich Songs and a publishing deal with Downtown Records. Shortly after, Bianco began working with The Jonas Brothers, for whom he produced and co-wrote "Time for Me to Fly" for their 2006 debut album, It's About Time, which was also featured in the film Aquamarine. Bianco co-wrote the hit single "When You Look Me in the Eyes", which won two Teen Choice Awards, for Best Love Song and Best Single. He co-wrote and produced "Cant Have You" on the Jonas Brothers' 2008 Billboard 200 number-one album A Little Bit Longer. He then worked with Nick Jonas on his solo album, producing and co-writing three songs, "In the End", "Last Time Around" and "Vesper's Goodbye".
Bianco produced "Rear View Mirror" for multi-platinum recording artist Mýa, featuring Sean Paul, that was included on her latest album, KISS. He co wrote and produced "Let the Rain Fall" for multi-platinum recording artist Iyaz. He co-wrote and produced the song "Out the Door" for Interscope recording artist J. Lewis. Bianco produced and co-wrote "Nightmare" for Australian musician, singer-songwriter and guitarist Orianthi. He co-wrote and produced the song "Don't Look Back" for singer-songwriter and actor Tyler Hilton. Bianco co-wrote two songs for Walt Disney Records singer-songwriter and actor Mitchel Musso, "Us Against the World", featuring Katelyn Tarver, and "Movin' In". He also worked with Teddy Geiger on "Ask Yourself Why". Bianco produced "'Wheres My Angel" for Metro Station, which was included on the 2010 Alice in Wonderland film soundtrack album, Almost Alice. He also co-wrote and produced "I Still Love You", "Run", "Barcelona" and "Take You Home" for Metro Station.
In 2009, Bianco co-wrote "Stop the World" for Demi Lovato's U.S. Billboard 200 number one album, Here We Go Again. He produced and co-wrote "Party Till We Crash" for the female group BG 5. Bianco co-wrote and produced two songs for Bonnie Mckee, "Don't Let It Go to Your Head" and "Girl Who Can't Say No". He co-wrote and produced "Let the Sun Shine" and "Why Don't You Grow Up" for Sophia Black. Bianco co-wrote and produced four songs for the Ajuku Girls, "Tokyo Drift", "Rainbow Sky", "Hono Ono", and "Oshiete". He co-wrote and produced "Down" for actress and singer Meaghan Jette Martin. He produced and co-wrote "Please Don't Let Go" and "Like a Rock" for RCA Records recording artist BC Jean. He produced and co-wrote "Breath" for singer-songwriter and producer Drew Ryan Scott. Bianco co-wrote and produced "Dose" for Atlantic Records recording artist Shanna Crooks. He also co-wrote and produced "Leaving You Lonely" for singer-songwriter and actor Eric Dill. He co-wrote and produced "I'm Not Like You", "My Heart's Off Switch", "Along for the Ride", and "Misery" for Stacy Barthe. He co-wrote and produced three songs for Cash Money Records group Savvy, "Dance with Me Now", "Top of the World", and "Turn the Music Up". Bianco co-wrote and produced "Happy" for Australian electronic rock/pop-punk group The Veronicas. He also co-wrote and produced "Never Enough" for platinum recording artist JoJo. He also wrote the theme song for the Oxygen Network's hit show The Bad Girls Club.In 2014, he worked with Warner Bros. singer-songwriter and recording artist LP, producing and co-writing music for album Forever for Now. Bianco is also working with Universal Republic recording artist Avery, co-writing and producing. Through 2014 and 2015 Bianco has been producing the sophomore album of German singer & songwriter  Mandy Capristo under Capitol Records scheduled as her worldwide debut release. He is also working with Interscope Records recording artist Haley Reinhart. Bianco continues to collaborate with other hit writers, such as Bonnie McKee (Katy Perry, Kerli, Britney Spears, Taio Cruz), BC Jean (Beyoncé), Nasri (Justin Bieber, Chris Brown, J. Lewis) and Stacy Barthe (Black Eyed Peas, Enrique Iglesias, Britney Spears). In addition, Bianco's ability as a multi-instrumentalist has also landed him a role producing for artists alongside mega producers like Dr. Luke and Polow da Don.  Bianco currently resides in Los Angeles and has begun working in his new recording studio in the NoHo Arts District.


== Discography ==


=== Song Writer/Producer ===
A R I Z O N A – Cross My Mind
Fifth Harmony – Better Together
"Who Are You"
"Me and My Girls"
Parade of Lights
"We're the Kids"
"Just Give It Up"
Elektrik People
"I Love My Life"
Demi Lovato – Here We Go Again
"Stop the World"
The Veronicas
"Happy"
LP – Forever for Now
"Into the Wild"
"Tokyo Sunrise"Lost on You

"Up Against Me"
"You Want It All"
Metro Station
"Where's My Angel" – Almost Alice
"I Still Love You"
"Run"
"Barcelona"
"Take You Home"
"Rain"
Mýa feat. Sean Paul – K.I.S.S.
"Rear View Mirror"
Stacy Barthe
"I'm Not Like You"
"My Hearts Off Switch"
"Along for the Ride"
"Misery"
Sophia Black
"Let the Sun Shine"
"Why Don't You Grow Up"
Jonas Brothers
"Time for Me to Fly"
"When You Look Me in the Eyes"
"Can't Have You"
Bonnie McKee
"Don't Let It Go To Your Head"
"Girl Who Can't Say No"
Haley Reinhart
"Soul on Fire"
Shanna Crooks
"Dose"
Drew Ryan Scott
"Breathe"
BC Jean
"Please Don't Let Go"
"Like a Rock"
Meaghan Jette Martin
"Down"
Nick Jonas and the Administration
"In the End"
"Last Time Around"
"Vesper's Goodbye"
Orianthi
"Nightmare"
Tyler Hilton
"Don't Look Back"
Mitchel Musso
"Us Against The World"
"Movin' In"
Eric Dill
"Leaving You Lonely"
Savvy (Cash Money Records)
"Dance with Me Now"
"Top of the World"
"Turn the Music Up"
Regina Spektor – (Engineer)
Brandy – (Engineer)
Mandy Capristo
"One Woman Army"


== References ==