Miranda Mulholland is a Canadian fiddle player and singer.


== Biography ==
Mulholland is a member of Great Lake Swimmers, Belle Starr, and The Rattlesnake Choir as well as the founder and lead singer for the Roaring Girl Cabaret. She makes select appearances in the violin show Bowfire, and has played fiddle with Jim Cuddy, John Borra and Justin Rutledge, among others. Not limited to band performances, Mulholland has appeared in various theatre productions including Parfumerie and the world premiere of Spoon River with Soulpepper Theatre in Toronto.
In addition to varied studio work, she has toured extensively in Europe and North America with the Celtic rock bands The Mahones, The Peelers, The Paperboys, The Glengarry Bhoys and the alt-country band Luther Wright and the Wrongs. She was a member of the Canadian cast of Barrage and was the vocal and fiddle soloist for the Irish dance show Spirit of Ireland and Celtic Blaze.
Mulholland can be heard on records by Justin Rutledge, Sarah Slean, NQ Arbuckle and Kevin Quain, and her debut album for The Roaring Girl Cabaret is titled In Last Night's Party Clothes. 
She was born in Guelph, Ontario and was a violin student of the Guelph Suzuki School, and studied opera performance at the University of Western Ontario and McGill University.
On May 13, 2014 Mulholland released her debut solo album Whipping Boy produced by multi-instrumentalist Sean Watkins (Nickel Creek) on her own boutique label Roaring Girl Records. Roaring Girl Records is distributed by Fontana North. In addition, Mulholland founded Sawdust City Music Festival in Gravenhurst, Ontario and is on the Board of Governors of Massey Hall & Roy Thompson Hall.In 2017 Mulholland formed a duo, Harrow Fair, with guitarist Andrew Penner.


== Discography ==
Bob Egan, Alejandro Escovedo Benefit CD (2004) - fiddle/vocals
The Glengarry Bhoys, Mill Sessions (2006) - fiddle/vocals
The Mahones, Take No Prisoners (2006) - fiddle
The Skye Consort, Courting Stories (2008) - vocals
Justin Rutledge, Man Descending (2008) - violin
NQ Arbuckle, XOK (2008) - fiddle
Kevin Quain, Winter in Babylon (2008) - fiddle
Sarah Slean, The Baroness (2008) - vocals
Luther Wright, Man of Your Dreams (2008) - fiddle
The Rattlesnake Choir, Live Music (2008) - fiddle/vocals
The Roaring Girl Cabaret, In Last Night's Party Clothes (2008) - composer, vocals, violin
Enter the Haggis, Gutter Anthems (2009) - vocals
Celtic Blaze, Cast Album (2009) - fiddle/vocals
Carolyn Mark and NQ Arbuckle, Let's Just Stay Here (2009) - fiddle
The Rattlesnake Choir, Walkin' the Wire(2011) - fiddle/vocals
Great Lake Swimmers, New Wild Everywhere (2012) - fiddle/vocals
Amos the Transparent, Goodnight My Dear...I'm Falling Apart - fiddle/vocals
Belle Starr, Belle Starr (2012) - fiddle/vocals
Miranda Mulholland, Whipping Boy (2014) - vocals/fiddle


== References ==