Shiv Dayal Batish (better known as S.D. Batish; 14 December 1914 – 29 July 2006) was an Indian singer and music director born in Patiala, India to a Brahmin family. He died in Santa Cruz, California, USA where he had lived since 1970.


== Career ==
Shiv was a composer, playback singer and music director for Bollywood music. He broadcast his first radio program in 1936, from the studios of All India Radio, Delhi. He has scored music for a number of early Bollywood movies such as Betab, Bahu Beti,Karwat 1949,Toofan, Harr jeet 1954, Tipu Sultan 1959, Ham Bhi Kuch Kam Nahin, Amar Keertan, and Zalim Tera Jawab Naheen.Shiv moved to the United Kingdom in 1964. While playing at a festival in Wales, Cardiff, he impressed Lord Fenner Brockway, who then helped him immigrate to the UK.He recorded a number of songs for the BBC where he became a regular radio and television artist. He wrote the words, composed the music, and sang the theme song "Nai Zindagi Naya Jivan" ("New Birth, New Life") to the BBC television show Apna Hi Ghar Samajhiye ("Make Yourself at Home"), a cornerstone of early South Asian programming. He had the honor of being the first musician featured when the Asian programs in Britain started back in 1965.
In early 1965, Batish played vichitra veena on the incidental music used in the Beatles' feature film Help! Batish subsequently gave dilruba lessons to Pattie Boyd, the wife of Beatles guitarist George Harrison, whose dedication to Indian classical music had helped popularise the genre in the West during the mid 1960s.In 1970 he moved to the USA to teach music at the University of California, Santa Cruz. He and his son Shri Ashwin Batish formed the Batish Institute of Indian music and Fine Arts.


== Books ==
Ragopedia, V. 1 - Exotic Scales of North India (Book)
Ragopedia Cassette - Accompaniment tape to Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Ragopedia V. 2, Exotic Scales of South India (Book)
First 10 Thaat Raga Chalans - (Text and Cassettes package)
Raga Chalans V. 1 (A-C) - Expansions for all the ragas from A to C as given in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Raga Chalans V. 2 (D-I) - Expansions for all the ragas from D to I as given in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Raga Chalans V. 3 (J-K) - Expansions for all the ragas from J to K as given in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Raga Chalans V. 4 (L-M) - Expansions for all the ragas from L to M as given in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Raga Chalans V. 5 (N-R) - Expansions for all the ragas from N to R as given in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Raga Chalans V. 6 (S) - Expansions for all the ragas under S as given in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Raga Chalans V. 7 (T-Y plus some rare ragas) - Expansions for all the ragas from T to Y plus a collection of rare ragas not previously listed in the Ragopedia V. 1 (Book)
Rasik Raga Lakshan Manjari V. 1 - History and Theory of North Indian Music with Lakshan Geets (introductory songs written in English) for the First Ten Thaats of the North Indian classical music system written in staff and sargam notations. (Book)
First Ten Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet - Written, composed and sung by S. D. Batish (Cassette / CD)
Rasik Raga Lakshan Manjari V. 2 - 100 further Lakshan Geet, 10 per Thaat written in staff and sargam notations. (Book)


== Audio CDs ==
Om Shanti Meditation - Dilruba (Cassette/CD)
Ram Bhajans - Hindu Devotional Songs (Cassette/CD)
72 Carnatic Melakarta of South India - volume 1 (Cassette/CD)
Raga Todi - Alaap and Bhajan "Jai Jia Mahadeva" (Cassette/CD)
Asavari Thaat Ragas Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Bhairava Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Bhairavi Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Bilaval Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Kafi Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Kalyan Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Khammaj Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet(Cassette/CD)
Marava Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)
Pooravi Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet(Cassette/CD)
Todi Thaat Raga Lakshan Geet (Cassette/CD)


== Notes ==


== External links ==
S D Batish - Personal Website Link
Batish on India's SaReGaMa Label of HMV