Perrie Louise Edwards (born 10 July 1993) is a British singer and member of the British girl group Little Mix. As of 2021, the group have sold over 65 million records worldwide, making them one of the world's best-selling girl groups of all time.Edwards in 2011 first auditioned for the eighth series of The X Factor as a solo act and made it through to bootcamp stage. However after her elimination, she was placed into a group with three other contestants to form the girl group Little Mix, and made history by becoming the first group to win the British version of the series. Since Little Mix formation they have sold over 2 million concert tickets worldwide, released six studio albums, and achieved five number-one singles on the UK Singles Chart.Edwards has also co-written songs for Little Mix albums since the beginning, including two UK number one singles "Wings" and "Shout Out to My Ex." Aside from music, she is the first female ambassador for the brand "Supreme Nutrition", and in 2021 she launched her own lifestyle and fashion brand called Disora.


== Early life ==
Perrie Louise Edwards was born on 10 July 1993, to parents Deborah "Debbie" Duffy and Alexander Edwards, who separated when she was young and both remarried. Edwards was raised in the Whiteleas area of South Shields, Tyne and Wear. alongside her brother named Jonnie Edwards and paternal half-sister named Caitlin Edwards. She is of English, Scottish, Irish and Swedish heritage.
Edwards was born with Esophageal Atresia which is a birth defect that causes the oesophagus to end in a blind-ended pouch rather than connecting normally to the stomach. As a child she underwent several operations in order to enlarge her oesophagus, leaving her with a scar on her stomach.During her childhood she attended Radipole Primary School in Weymouth, Dorset before moving back to South Shields. She attended St. Peter and Paul RC Primary School, and Mortimer Community College in South Shields, and later transferred to Newcastle College, where she received a BTEC in Performing Arts. Edwards lived in Hamilton, New Zealand for two years as a teenager.


== Career ==
Her first audition on The X Factor was "You Oughta Know" by Alanis Morissette. After she failed the first bootcamp challenge to progress through to the Girls category (solo females aged 16–24), Edwards was then placed in a four-piece group named "Faux Pas" alongside Jesy Nelson. Jade Thirlwall and Leigh-Anne Pinnock were in another group called "Orion". Both groups, however, failed to progress. Later, a decision was made by the judges to bring back the four to form the four-piece group Rhythmix, and they progressed to judges' houses. They eventually reached the live shows and were mentored by Tulisa Contostavlos. On 28 October 2011, it was announced that the band's new name would be Little Mix. On 11 December 2011, Little Mix were announced as the winners, making them the first band ever to win the show.Edwards has released six albums with the band, DNA (2012), Salute (2013), Get Weird (2015), Glory Days (2016), LM5 (2018) and Confetti (2020). In 2019, she became the new face for the Italian brand Superga and released her first designed collection of shoes. In 2020, Edwards become the first female ambassador for the brand "Supreme Nutrition". Later that year, Edwards was revealed as the new face of Nando's, a Portuguese-African food franchise. She also appeared in their television advertisements.Edwards first teased her lifestyle and fashion brand, Disora, in late 2020, when she changed her Instagram bio link to the Disora website. The account made their first post on 10 October 2021 teasing the brand’s launch, with an official announcement of the launch date following on 22 October 2021. Disora have described themselves as a "contemporary luxury" brand.


== Personal life ==
In 2012 during the recording stages for Little Mix's album, Edwards underwent surgery to remove her inflamed tonsils. In the same year of May 2012, she started dating British singer Zayn Malik, after they met when she was a contestant on The X Factor UK in 2011. In August 2013 the couple announced their engagement but separated in August 2015.In November 2016, Edwards began dating English professional footballer Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, but their relationship was not confirmed until February in 2017. Edward's suffers from a condition called esophageal atresia, which is responsible for the bisectional scar on her stomach, and anosmia. In 2017, Edwards was scheduled to perform alongside Little Mix in Las Vegas but was later hospitalized due to suffering from gastric problems.In August 2018, Edwards revealed via Instagram that she received further treatment on her throat following her condition with esophagus. In April 2019, she shared her struggles with Panic attacks and anxiety via Instagram and was interviewed by Glamour Magazine regarding this subject. On 10 May 2021, Edward's announced that she was expecting her first child with Oxlade-Chamberlain, and on 21 August 2021 the couple welcomed their son, Axel  Oxlade-Chamberlain.


== Discography ==


=== Songwriting credits ===


== Filmography ==


== References ==