Paul Turner (born 11 March 1968) is an English bassist and a member of the jazz-funk band Jamiroquai.


== Biography ==
Although known primarily as a member of Jamiroquai since 2005, and for his association with Annie Lennox since 2002, Paul has also recorded and/or performed live with more than 70 "named artistes", including icons like Tina Turner, Bryan Ferry, Tom Jones and George Michael, and boybands including Take That, Gary Barlow and 911.
Paul cut his teeth at a young age with respected soul singers like Ruby Turner and Edwin Starr, before going onto tour the world with many of the UK’s most successful pop bands, generally during their heyday. He juggled those arenas with club dates, theatre tours and recording sessions for numerous R&B singers such as Omar, Lamont Dozier and Mica Paris, and jazz-funk names like Down To The Bone and Jeff Lorber.
Between Jamiroquai commitments, Paul is active in many genres of music and in a variety of surroundings. He has his own funk/soul band called Shuffler, and he is also involved in the eclectic progressive rock trio The Dark Sinatras, who released their first album in May 2012. He was also in the house band for live performances of the 2013 season of the UK TV show The Voice, and he has since continued to record for various artistes.


=== Musical style and equipment ===
Turner mainly uses two basses for live performances with Jamiroquai, including a five-string Alleva Coppolo and a four-string 1966 Fender Jazz. (Both are Olympic White with tortoiseshell pick-guards.) For amplification, Turner uses Aguilar heads and cabinets. For larger stages, Turner favors a DB751 head with a pair of GS 4x10s; and, for club gigs, he uses the Tone Hammer 500 with two or more SL112s.
His playing style is mainly towards funk/pop and R&B, but it's also influenced by rock and progressive genres. His style suits his position in Jamiroquai, giving him a sharp, clean, and popping sound that works well for a classic disco bass feel, and allows for versatility.


== References ==