Martina Stoessel-Muzlera (born 21 March 1997), known professionally as Martina Stoessel (Spanish: [ˈtini estoˈesel]), or by the stage name Tini (stylised in all caps) is an Argentine actress, singer, dancer and model. Stoessel began her career by appearing on the Argentine children's television series Patito Feo (2007–2008). In her teens, she rose to prominence for her lead role as Violetta Castillo in the Disney Channel Latin America original telenovela, Violetta (2012–2015).
Following her role in the Violetta, Stoessel has recorded eight successful soundtrack albums, that includes original musical numbers from diverse musical genres such as pop music and Latin music. The albums reached No. 1 and top 5 positions in Argentina and several European countries, and were also reached multiple gold and platinum certifications. Alongside her television career, Stoessel has starred her role in the film Tini: The Movie (2016), a sequel to the Violetta, where she along with four cast members from series, reprise their roles.
With achieved great worldwide success, Stoessel signed with Hollywood Records, to release her self-titled debut studio album, Tini (Martina Stoessel) (2016). The album contains Spanish-English songs, and also includes music from Tini: The Movie. The album sold over 200,000 copies worldwide in less than two months, and reached No. 1 in Argentina, as well as the top 10 in Italy, Germany, Austria, Poland and several other countries in Europe. Stoessel's sophomore studio album, Quiero Volver (2018) with the sound of latin pop, reached at the top of the album chart in Argentina, becoming her second No. 1 album in the country. The album's lead single, which is AR certified platinum, "Te Quiero Más", and single "Por Que Te Vas", were Stoessel's first songs that charted in the top 20 on the AR Billboard Hot 100. The album also spawned her single collaborations "Princesa" with Karol G, with whom she broke through US Latin Airplay and US Latin Pop charts, and album's title track, a collaboration with Sebastián Yatra, that reached number 21 on the AR Hot 100.
Stoessel maintained her latin pop and ballad sound, where she also experimented new sounds like reggaeton, cumbia and trap on her third studio album, Tini Tini Tini (2020), which received double diamond certification by CAPIF, for selling more than 500,000 digital copies in Argentina. Tini Tini Tini album, spawned her singles AR double platinum "Fresa", AR platinum "Oye" and AR gold "Ella Dice", that were Stoessel's first singles to debut at top 5 in AR Billboard Hot 100. The singles made her break the record for most top 5 debuts on the AR Hot 100 chart. In 2021, Stoessel achieved big success with the single "Miénteme", by which she announced her upcoming fourth studio album. The single debuted at No. 1 on Billboard AR Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's first number-one single on the chart. The single also found its way in high position on the Billboard Global 200 and Global Exl. US, making Stoessel the first Argentine artist to achieve such success.
Stoessel's accolades include one Gardel Award, seven Quiero Awards, one Argentina Kids' Choice Award, one Colombia Kids' Choice Award, three Bravo Otto Awards, two Martín Fierro Awards, one Billboard Award AR, one LOS40 Music Award,  two MTV Millennial Awards, one MTV Europe Music Award and nominations for the Heat Latin Music Awards, Nickelodeon Kid's Choice Awards, Urban Music Awards among others. In 2016, 2019 and 2021 Stoessel was named one of the 10 most influential women from Argentina. She became the only artist that ever completely sold-out nine Estadio Luna Park shows with her Quiero Volver Tour. In 2020, Stoessel was named Billboard's Argentina artist of the year and No. 1 Argentine artist on Spotify.


== Life and career ==


=== 1997–2011: Early life and career beginnings ===
Stoessel was born in Buenos Aires, the daughter of Mariana Muzlera and television director and producer Alejandro Stoessel. She has a brother, Francisco, who is one year older than her. Stoessel began her artistic training at a young age studying singing, piano, musical comedy, musical theater, and dance in her native Buenos Aires. Stoessel was educated at two private bilingual schools: Colegio San Marcos and Colegio Martín y Omar de San Isidro.In 2007, Stoessel had a role in the first season of the popular Argentine children's telenovela, Patito Feo, as "Martina", one of Fito Bernardi's assistants. She also played the role of "Anna" in a flashback episode in the same series.
In 2011, Stoessel recorded the Spanish version of the Shannon Saunders' song, "The Glow", called "Tu Resplandor"; the song was included on the album, Disney Princess: Fairy Tale Songs. She performed the song at an event for Disney Channel Latin America called Celebratón on 31 December 2011. The song was later released on an album for the series in March 2012.


=== 2012–2014: Breakthrough with Violetta ===

Stoessel's father presented an unrelated project to Disney Channel producers, who later informed him about auditions for the lead role for the network's upcoming television series, Violetta. In late 2011, after an intense casting process, Stoessel obtained the principal role in the series, a tween-oriented musical series launched as a co-production between Disney Channel Latin America, Europe, Middle East and Africa. The show's first season began production in Buenos Aires in 2012. Stoessel played the titular character, Violetta Castillo, during all three seasons of the show. She sang the series' theme song, "En Mi Mundo", which was later released as a single on 5 April 2012 to promote the show. Subsequently, she recorded the Italian version, "Nel Mio Mondo" and the English version, "In My Own World". Both songs were used as the theme songs for the series in its international broadcasts in Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States via Netflix. For this role Stoessel won an award for "Female Newcomer" in the 2012 edition of the Kids' Choice Awards Argentina and was also nominated for the U.S. version, the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards, in the "Favorite Latin Artist" category.

From 2012 to 2014, Stoessel participated in the recording of albums featuring music from all three seasons of Violetta. The albums were a huge worldwide success, reaching high positions on the charts of various Latin American and European countries, where they also received multiple gold and platinum certifications. In 2013, Stoessel and the cast of Violetta embarked on their first tour Violetta en Vivo, of Latin America and Europe, in support of the series and its albums. On 10 August 2013, Stoessel performed, along with the cast of Violetta, at the UNICEF television charity event Un sol para los chicos, where she sang the songs, "Ser Mejor" and "En Mi Mundo". In 2013, Stoessel recorded "Libre Soy" and "All'Alba Sorgerò", the Spanish and Italian versions of the pop version of "Let It Go", the closing credits song from the Disney animated film Frozen.Stoessel also participated in the television programs The U-Mix Show and Disney Planet for Disney Channel Latin America. In 2014, Stoessel voiced a small role for the Italian dubbed version of the Disney animated film Monsters University. In May 2014, Stoessel released her first book, a co-authored biography called "Simplemente Tini", about on her upbringing and eventual rise to international popularity. The same month, Stoessel held a free musical concert near the Monument to the Carta Magna and Four Regions of Argentina, organized by the city government of Buenos Aires, under the slogan "Cuidemos el planeta". In September 2014, Stoessel performed at a charity soccer match Partido Interreligioso por la Paz, convened by Pope Francis at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome where she sang "Nel Mio Mondo" and the cover version of John Lennon's song "Imagine".


=== 2015–2017: Film debut and musical solo debut ===
Stoessel and some of the cast members of Violetta filmed the movie, Tini: The Movie. Production began on 7 October 2015 and ended in mid-December 2015, where the movie filmed in various international locations, including Sicily, Cádiz, Spain, Madrid, and Buenos Aires. A teaser trailer featuring scenes from the movie was released in late December 2015. The film was released in various Latin American and European countries. It was to be released in Argentina on 14 July 2016, but was released earlier on 2 June 2016. The movie was filmed in between concert stops for the television series' final international tour called Violetta Live. This tour was listed at top 5 highest-grossing tours in 2015, and top 5 most highest-grossing tours by Disney act ever, breaking the record of her last tour, Violetta en Vivo. On 21 August 2015, it was announced that Stoessel had signed a recording deal with Hollywood Records to release her own solo material under the newly adopted stage name "Tini", (stylised in all caps).

From January 2016 to early March 2016 she recorded her debut album in Los Angeles, California. Her debut album, TINI (Martina Stoessel), was released worldwide on digital and physical formats on 29 April 2016. The album contains two discs: one which serves as the soundtrack from Tini: The Movie and Stoessel's solo album of Spanish and English language songs. Stoessel announced that "Siempre Brillarás" would be the lead single used to promote the release of Tini: The Movie. The song was available to fans on 25 March 2016 with the pre-order purchase of her debut album. The song was also recorded in English and was released under the title, "Born to Shine". The music video for "Siempre Brillarás", featuring scenes from Tini: The Movie, was released on 25 March 2016. The music video for the soundtrack's second promotional single, "Losing the Love", was released on 6 May 2016, and its music video included clips from the film. Stoessel performed songs from her debut album at her first showcase as a solo artist at La Usina del Arte in Buenos Aires on 12 June 2016. The showcase was filmed and broadcast on her official YouTube channel from 22 to 28 August 2016. On 24 June 2016, Stoessel released her second solo single, "Great Escape", along with the Spanish-language version of the song, "Yo Me Escaparé". The music video for "Great Escape" was filmed in Buenos Aires and later released on 8 July 2016. On 14 October 2016, Stoessel released the deluxe edition of her debut album, which includes "Yo Me Escaparé" and the Spanish-language version of the song "Got Me Started", "Ya No Hay Nadie Que Nos Pare", with vocals from Colombian singer Sebastián Yatra. 

Stoessel released "Got Me Started", along with "Ya No Hay Nadie Que Nos Pare", as her third solo single to coincide with the release of the deluxe edition of her album. The music video for "Got Me Started" was released on 8 December 2016, while the video for "Ya No Hay Nadie Que Nos Pare" was released on 19 January 2017. Stoessel's fourth solo single, "Si Tú Te Vas", was released on 5 May 2017, alongside the music video for the song. On 18 March 2017, Stoessel began her first solo concert tour, Got Me Started Tour, starting from Europe and then heading on to Latin America. The tour was listed as the highest-grossing tour of 2017 in Argentina, and on Pollstar's "2017 Mid-Top 100 Worldwide Tours" list. In the summer of 2017, Stoessel guest starred as herself in two episodes of the second season of Disney Channel Latin America telenovela series, Soy Luna. In June, Stoessel was featured on "Todo Es Posible", a collaboration with Spanish singer David Bisbal for the Tad Jones: The Hero Returns movie soundtrack. In July, Stoessel was featured on "It's a Lie", the song from The Vamps's third studio album Night & Day, and she also appeared alongside fellow artist and the Voz Por La Paz foundation patron Odino Faccia on the world peace anthem, "Somos El Cambio", which was written by the former President of the United States, Barack Obama, and the song was first performed at the Red Voz Por La Paz ceremony the previous year.


=== 2017–2019: Quiero Volver and La Voz... Argentina ===

The collaboration between Stoessel and Venezuelan singer Nacho titled "Te Quiero Más" was released on 13 October 2017 as the lead single from her second album. In December 2017, Stoessel made a guest appearance as herself in an episode of the telenovela Las Estrellas, and she was featured in a remix of "Lights Down Low" by MAX, titled "Latin Mix". On 6 April 2018, Stoessel released "Princesa", a duet with Karol G, as the second single from her second album. The single became Stoessel's first single to top the national chart in Argentina. Also, the single reached US Latin Airplay and US Latin Pop charts. On 22 June 2018, Stoessel released "Consejo de Amor", featuring Colombian folk-rock band Morat, as the third single from her second album. On 26 July 2018, Stoessel was featured alongside Flo Rida on a remix of Álvaro Soler's hit single "La Cintura". In August 2018, it was announced that Stoessel had joined La Voz... Argentina as a coach for the reality competition show's second season; Stoessel is the youngest judge on any incarnation of The Voice franchise. On 3 August 2018, Stoessel released the title track "Quiero Volver", a duet with Sebastián Yatra, as the fourth single from her second album. On 24 August 2018, Stoessel was featured alongside Colombian singer Greeicy in a remix of the song "Lo malo" by Spanish singers Aitana and Ana Guerra.In September 2018, Stoessel announced her second concert tour, Quiero Volver Tour, that began on 13 December 2018 at Estadio Luna Park in Buenos Aires. Thanks to this tour, Stoessel achieved a record as the Argentine artist with the most sold-out tickets at Estadio Luna Park, performing a total of nine concerts, eight of which were completely sold out. Stoessel's second album titled Quiero Volver was released on 12 October 2018. On 2 November 2018, Stoessel released "Por Que Te Vas", a collaboration with Cali y El Dandee, as the fifth single from her second album. In the same month, she was featured alongside Chelcee Grimes and Jhay Cortez on "Wild", the song from Jonas Blue's debut album Blue, released as a single in February 2019. Stoessel voiced Moxy in the Spanish dubbed version of the animated musical comedy film UglyDolls, released in May 2019.


=== 2019–2020: Tini Tini Tini and television projects ===

In May 2019, it was announced that Stoessel had joined the reality talent show Pequeños Gigantes Argentina as a judge. The collaboration between Stoessel and Greeicy titled "22" was released on 3 May 2019 as the first single from Stoessel's third album. The song peaked at number eight on Argentina Hot 100 and became Stoessel's first top-ten single on the chart. On 14 June 2019, Stoessel was featured on "Sad Song", a collaboration with Swedish DJ Alesso. On 26 July 2019, Stoessel released "Suéltate El Pelo" as the second single from her third album, as well as part of promotion for Pantene. On 6 September 2019, Stoessel released "Fresa", a collaboration with Colombian singer Lalo Ebratt, as the third single from her third album. The song peaked at number three on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's first top-five single on the chart. On 11 October 2019, Stoessel released "Oye", a duet with Sebastián Yatra, as the fourth single from her third album. The song debuted at number three on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's second top-five single on the chart in a row. The single became the third song in the history of the chart to achieve a debut at No. 3, and made Stoessel the only female to debut two songs in the top-5 on the AR Hot chart. On 10 January 2020, Stoessel released "Recuerdo", a collaboration with Venezuelan duo Mau y Ricky, as the fifth single from her third album.The collaboration between Stoessel and Colombian producer Ovy on the Drums titled "Ya no me llames" was released on 25 March 2020. In May 2020, Stoessel released, in collaboration with YouTube, a two-part docuseries titled Tini Quiero Volver Tour. It shows behind the scenes and concert footage from Stoessel's Quiero Volver Tour, and follows her professional life during the tour. The series debuted on 22 May 2020. Stoessel appeared alongside Dutch DJ and producer R3hab and Mexican pop rock band Reik in a song titled "Bésame (I Need You)", released on 5 June 2020. On 15 July 2020, Stoessel appeared alongside fellow trap artist Khea on "Ella Dice", the sixth single from her third album. The song peaked at number four on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's third top-five single on the chart. On 3 September 2020, Stoessel appeared alongside Lola Índigo on the remix of María Becerra's song titled "High". The remix peaked at number two on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's fourth top-five single on the chart.On 24 September 2020, Stoessel released "Duele", featuring trap artist John C, as the seventh single from her third album. The song peaked at number ten on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's sixth top-ten single on the chart. In October 2020, Stoessel served as a key advisor on the Spanish version of The Voice for its seventh season. On 29 October 2020, Stoessel appeared alongside Alejandro Sanz on "Un Beso en Madrid", the eighth single from her third album. On 16 November 2020, Stoessel announced that her third album would be titled Tini Tini Tini and it would be released on 3 December 2020. Stoessel made history, having received a double diamond certification for the album. The album was also listed at Top 5 Most Listened To Albums Worldwide on Spotify Charts. The day of the album's release, Stoessel released "Te Olvidaré" as the ninth single. On 6 December 2020, Stoessel performed in a livestream concert titled Tini Tini Tini Live, where she sang various songs from her third album. It was also reported that Stoessel would star alongside Sebastián Yatra in a Disney+ streaming television series titled Siempre fui yo. On 24 December 2020, Stoessel announced that she and Yatra have left the series pre-production following their separation and the COVID-19 pandemic, with their respective roles being taken over by Karol Sevilla and Pipe Bueno.


=== 2021–present: Upcoming fourth studio album ===
In March 2021, Stoessel revealed that she signed with Sony Music Latin. The collaboration between Stoessel and María Becerra titled "Miénteme" was released on 29 April 2021 as the lead single from Stoessel's upcoming fourth album. The song peaked at number one on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's first number-one single on the chart. The song also peaked at Billboard Global 200, and Global Excl. US, making Stoessel and Becerra first and only Argentine artists appearing on Global 200. In June 2021, Stoessel gave an interview for the fashion magazine Vanity Teen, reviewing her career and her influence as a woman in today's society. On 21 June 2021, Stoessel appeared alongside rapper Duki on the remix of musical duo MYA's song "2:50". The remix peaked at number three on Argentina Hot 100. On 2 July 2021, Stoessel collaborated alongside singers Lola Índigo and Belinda on the song "La Niña de la Escuela" from the former's album La Niña. On 19 August 2021, Stoessel released "Maldita Foto", a collaboration with singer Manuel Turizo, as the second single from her upcoming fourth album. Stoessel appeared alongside Danny Ocean on the song "Tú no me conoces", released on 1 October 2021. On 30 October 2021, Stoessel held a concert at Posadas, attended by more than 100,000 people and thus broke her record. On 11 November 2021, Stoessel released "Bar", a collaboration with singer L-Gante, as the third single from her upcoming fourth album, and she announced the following day a concert tour Tini Tour 2022 supporting the album, set to begin on 21 March 2022. "Bar" debuted at number six on Argentina Hot 100 and the song's top ten debut on the chart made Stoessel and L-Gante artists appearing on Hot Shot Debut. The song later peaked at number one on Argentina Hot 100, becoming Stoessel's second number-one single on the chart.On 26 November 2021, Stoessel contributed to the soundtrack of the animated film Koati with a song titled "Vueltas en Tu Mente". On 29 November 2021, in an interview with Glamour Mexico, Stoessel announced that her fourth album will be released in 2022 and that she has experimented with new musical genres and collaborated with several artists on it, and she also revealed that she's starring in a Chinese period drama film titled The Diary, directed by Jackie Chan, and that the movie's release date got delayed to 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 9 December 2021, Stoessel released a song titled "Aquí Estoy" as part of her second collaboration with Pantene, coinciding with the release of the music video featuring the winners of the Aquí Estoy Challenge and the promotional livestream concert titled Aquí Estoy Show.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style ===
While working on Violetta, Stoessel met with pop music and Latin music. She later transferred the pop sound to her first solo album Tini (Martina Stoessel). As Stoessel matured on her second album Quiero Volver, she began to use the more serious sound of Latin music. Later in her third album Tini Tini Tini, Stoessel experimented with genres that are common to her country and that she has not yet tried, such as reggaeton, cumbia, urban and trap music. In addition, Stoessel is also recognizable by her romantic ballads. She also used in the poem with tango and said that "tango and reggaeton is something that represents Argentina and all Argentines. Those genres represent the Argentine heritage.".


=== Influences ===
Even before being released by Disney, and even more because of that, Stoessel was already a fan and was inspired throughout her career by Miley Cyrus, Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez, who, like her, were successful protagonists in Disney Channel's series and later launched themselves in the music industry. She was even questioned by the media if she would follow the same path, sometimes controversial, of some of them and she stated that each one does what they like and follows their own road, she would not follow the same path as the other Disney stars.As Stoessel grew in her profession as a singer, she also had other inspirations. In 2019, in an interview with Seventeen magazine in Mexico, when asked which was the biggest of them, Stoessel replied: "Beyoncé! She's awesome, I love her. I love everything she does, her music, her shows are amazing, how she dances... I like that you can see how she is present in the smallest details.". This was already confirmed in previous years by her visual style (she worked with stylist Paula Selby Avellaneda, who worked with Beyoncé), her live performances and choreographies. Stoessel has always made clear her admiration and how much she is a fan of the singer, citing her on her YouTube channel in 2016 as the person who she would most like to collaborate with. While in the Latin world, Stoessel said that she grew up listening to Daddy Yankee and Alejandro Sanz, with whom she recorded a ballad "Un Beso en Madrid", which she described as "dream come true" .


== Personal life ==
Stoessel resided in San Isidro, Buenos Aires with her parents and her brother, until she temporarily moved to Miami, Florida, due to the expansion of her music career. She speaks Spanish (her native language), Italian, and English.


=== Relationships ===
In 2013, Stoessel started dating fellow Argentine actor Peter Lanzani. After two years of dating, they broke up in April 2015. They got back together in the summer of the same year, but broke up again in December 2015.In September 2016, Stoessel announced that she started dating Spanish model Pepe Barroso Silva, who was a guest star in the music video for "Great Escape". In February 2018, Stoessel announced that she and Silva are no longer dating, but they got back together in May 2018. On 22 December 2018, Stoessel announced that she and Silva broke up again.On 10 June 2019, during the Martin Fierro awards ceremony, Stoessel announced that she started dating Colombian singer and frequent collaborator Sebastián Yatra. In May 2020, it was announced that Stoessel and Yatra broke up.


== Other ventures ==
In 2016, Stoessel became the face of the clothing brand Cher. Later, she launched her clothing line called Tini by Martina Stoessel.


=== Activism and philanthropy ===
On 10 August 2013, Stoessel performed, along with the cast of Violetta, at the UNICEF television charity event Un sol para los chicos, where she sang the songs, "Ser Mejor" and "En Mi Mundo". On 17 November 2016, Stoessel was named an honorary ambassador of the world peace by fellow human rights activist Adolfo Pérez Esquivel and Guatemalan political activist Rigoberta Menchú, at the Red voz por la paz ceremony in Buenos Aires. She is also a philanthropist and uses her fame as a platform to positively influence the lives of people around her.
In August 2018 and 2019, Stoessel participated again in Un sol para los chicos, a solidarity campaign for the benefit of UNICEF. Stoessel became a part of UNICEF's protect #GeneracionUnica for the rights of every child.


== Filmography ==


== Discography ==

Tini (Martina Stoessel) (2016)
Quiero Volver (2018)
Tini Tini Tini (2020)


== Tours ==
Violetta en Vivo (2013–14)
Violetta Live (2015)
Got Me Started Tour (2017–18)
Quiero Volver Tour (2018–20)
Tini Tour 2022 (2022)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Tini on Instagram
TINI - official YouTube channel
Martina Stoessel at IMDb
Tini at AllMusic