Steve Kuhn (born March 24, 1938) is an American jazz pianist, composer, arranger, bandleader, and educator.


== Biography ==
Kuhn was born in Brooklyn, New York City, United States. He began studying piano at the age of five and studied under Boston piano teacher Margaret Chaloff, mother of jazz baritone saxophonist Serge Chaloff, who taught him the "Russian style" of piano playing. At an early age he began improvising classical music. As a teenager he appeared in jazz clubs in the Boston area with Coleman Hawkins, Vic Dickenson, Chet Baker, and Serge Chaloff.
After graduating from Harvard, he attended the Lenox School of Music where he was associated with Ornette Coleman, Don Cherry, and Gary McFarland. The school's faculty included Bill Evans, George Russell, Gunther Schuller, and the members of the Modern Jazz Quartet. This allowed Kuhn to play, study, and create with some of the most forward-thinking innovators of jazz improvisation and composition; it culminated with his joining trumpeter Kenny Dorham's group for an extended time and (briefly) John Coltrane's quartet at New York's Jazz Gallery club.Kuhn also has appeared with Stan Getz, Art Farmer, Oliver Nelson, Gary McFarland, Ron Carter, Scott LaFaro, Harvie Swartz, vocalist Sheila Jordan, Billy Drummond, David Finck, and Miroslav Vitous. From 1967 to 1971 Kuhn moved to Stockholm, Sweden where he worked with his own trio throughout Europe. In 1971 Kuhn moved back to New York City and formed a quartet but continued doing European gigs and appearing at the Newport Jazz Festival.
In his early years, Kuhn was known as an avant-garde jazz pianist. He was associated with bassist Steve Swallow and drummer Pete La Roca during the 1960s on several notable recordings: Three Waves, under Kuhn's leadership; Basra, under La Roca's leadership, which also featured Joe Henderson; and Sing Me Softly of the Blues under flugelhornist Art Farmer's leadership. Also notable was Kuhn's inclusion in the quartet on the landmark recording Sound Pieces led by saxophonist, composer, and arranger Oliver Nelson and including Ron Carter on bass and Grady Tate on drums. Among other critically acclaimed recordings there was The October Suite composed by Gary McFarland for Kuhn and an ensemble which included strings, woodwinds, and reeds. The Promises Kept album features Kuhn's compositions, piano, and strings.
For decades, Steve Kuhn has led all-star trios that have included such players as bassists Ron Carter and David Finck, and drummers Al Foster, Jack DeJohnette, and Joey Baron. He has had several live recordings made in some of New York's leading jazz clubs. Kuhn is also the composer of the jazz standard "The Saga of Harrison Crabfeathers".
Steve Kuhn was among hundreds of artists whose material was destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire.


== Discography ==


=== As leader/co-leader ===


=== Compilations ===
2009 Life's Backward Glances (ECM): Solo Piano, Trios, and Quartets with Steve Slagle or Sheila Jordan


=== As sideman ===
1960 Kenny Dorham: Jazz Contemporary (Time Records)
1960 John Rae: Opus de Jazz 2 (Savoy)
1961 Stan Getz: Recorded Fall 1961 (Verve) with Bob Brookmeyer, Roy Haynes
1963 Stan Getz & Laurindo Almeida: Stan Getz With Guest Artist Laurindo Almeida (Verve)
1965 Art Farmer: Sing Me Softly of the Blues (Atlantic)
1965 Pete La Roca: Basra (Blue Note)
1966 Oliver Nelson: Sound Pieces (Impulse!)
1966 Pee Wee Russell and Henry "Red" Allen: The College Concert (Impulse!)
1967 Don Heckman and Ed Summerlin: The Don Heckman-Ed Summerlin Improvisational Jazz Workshop (Ictus)
1968 Lee Konitz, Pony Poindexter, Phil Woods and Leo Wright: Alto Summit (MPS)
1979 Steve Swallow: Home (ECM)
1981 David Darling: Cycles (ECM)
1991 Steve Swallow: Swallow (XtraWATT)
1997 Sheila Jordan: Jazz Child (HighNote)
2002 Bob Mintzer : "Bop Boy" (Explore Records) with Eddie Gomez & Steve Gadd
2013 Tisziji Munoz: Incomprehensibly Gone (Anami)


== References ==


== External links ==
Steve Kuhn discography at JazzDiscography.com
Steve Kuhn on ECM Records
Steve Kuhn at SunnysideRecords.com
Interview with Steve Kuhn
Steve Kuhn in-studio performance from WGBH Radio Boston
NY Times -- Steve Kuhn: Revisiting an Old Boss Named John Coltrane
Steve Kuhn Interview NAMM Oral History Library (1997)