Claude Coleman Jr. is an American musician, best known as the drummer for the alternative rock group Ween. He has also worked with Eagles of Death Metal, Chocolate Genius, The Wooden Soldiers, Elysian Fields and 3 Input Woman.
A multi-instrumentalist, Coleman is also the singer/songwriter for his own group Amandla. In 2006, he released his second album as Amandla, titled The Full Catastrophe. In June 2013, Coleman raised $11,158 through Indiegogo to fund his third album.
Coleman survived a near-fatal car accident on August 7, 2002, in which he suffered multiple pelvic fractures and brain injuries. During his extensive and difficult recovery, members of Ween organized a series of benefit concerts on October 7 and 8, 2002, New York's Bowery Ballroom. Josh Freese performed with Ween in Coleman's place. Coleman ultimately recovered sufficiently to resume his touring and recording activities, and remained an active member of Ween until their dissolution in May 2012, and has performed with Ween since their reunion in February 2016.Coleman is also active in music education through the Paul Green School of Rock, and through the New York City music program Music Ascension. Throughout his musical career, especially when touring with Ween, Coleman has been known for his creative percussive styles (e.g. playing his drum set bare-handed in when performing live in Chicago, to emulate a "bongo-esque" sound).
Since 2017, he has co-owned and actively managed SoundSpace@Rabbit's, a music rehearsal and art studio facility inside of a 1947 Black-owned tourist court and soul food cafe’ known as Rabbit’s Motel, in the historically African-American district of Southside, Asheville, NC. It is soon to include a new soul food cafe’ Areta’s, along with a multi-artist murals project celebrating rich and lost history. Coleman endorses Aquarian drumheads, Bosphorus cymbals, and Vater drumsticks.
He is a graduate of Columbia High School in Maplewood, NJ.


== Discography ==
Main articles: Ween discography
With Amandla

Falling Alone (2001)
The Full Catastrophe (2006)
Laughing Hearts (2018)


== References ==