Sir Robert Bryson Hall II (born January 22, 1990), known professionally as Logic, is an American rapper and record producer. He has released six studio albums and received two Grammy Award nominations.
Logic began his music career in 2010, releasing the mixtape Young, Broke & Infamous; he gained popularity with his Young Sinatra mixtape series, with the response to its third iteration, Young Sinatra: Welcome to Forever (2013), helping Logic secure a recording contract with Def Jam Recordings. Logic's first two studio albums — Under Pressure (2014) and The Incredible True Story (2015) — both peaked within the top five on the U.S. Billboard 200, while the former was ultimately certified platinum.Logic achieved mainstream popularity in 2017 with Everybody; the album charted at number one in the United States and was certified platinum, while its lead single, "1-800-273-8255", reached number three on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and was a top-ten hit internationally. He also released the commercial mixtape series Bobby Tarantino. His fourth and fifth albums, YSIV (2018) and Confessions of a Dangerous Mind (2019), achieved similar commercial success, with the latter containing the single "Homicide", which peaked at number 5 on the Hot 100. After his sixth album No Pressure (2020), Logic retired from music; he returned to music in 2021.
As an author, Logic released the novel Supermarket (2019), which was accompanied by a soundtrack of the same name. The book became a New York Times Best Seller, but both works received generally mixed to negative critical reception. He published his memoir, This Bright Future, in 2021. Logic is also a streamer and is signed exclusively with Twitch, the first musician to do so.


== Early life and education ==
Sir Robert Bryson Hall II was born on January 22, 1990, at Shady Grove Hospital in Rockville, Maryland. He was born to Robert Bryson Hall, a black Maryland native, and a white mother. Between his father and mother, he has seven half-siblings. Logic spent much of his youth in the West Deer Park neighborhood in Gaithersburg, Maryland. His father suffered from a cocaine addiction and his mother suffered from alcoholism. Despite his father initially being absent in his childhood, Logic was able to reconnect with Hall due to his burgeoning rap career. During his early adolescent years, Logic witnessed his brothers produce and distribute crack cocaine to "addicts all over the block", including to his father. Logic maintains that he accurately knows how to manufacture and produce crack cocaine following these experiences.He attended neighboring Gaithersburg High School. However, he did not graduate and was soon expelled after he began skipping classes in the tenth grade. Logic would comment on the expulsion, stating "I started doing badly and failed every class but English, so they kicked me out of school, they gave up on me."


== Career ==


=== 2005–2012: Early career and various mixtapes ===
At the age of 13, Logic met Solomon Taylor, who would soon become his mentor. Logic became interested in rap and hip hop after watching the movie Kill Bill: Volume 1, directed by Quentin Tarantino. The film's score was produced by RZA, a member of the hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan. Following this, Logic began listening to the group, and soon expressed a deep affection for hip hop. Logic bought the Roots' album Do You Want More?!!!??! later that year, which prompted Taylor to bring Logic a large number of CDs containing instrumental beats, for him to write lyrics over. In 2009, Logic performed under the stage name "Psychological" with Logic describing the name as "one name that really stuck [with me]. I just loved this word because it was about the mind and I knew that's what I wanted my music to consist of; something that really challenges the mind". He released an unofficial mixtape titled Psychological – Logic: The Mixtape under his original stage name. The mixtape allowed Logic to serve as the opening act for artists like Pitbull, EPMD, Method Man, Redman, and Ludacris at various shows all over Maryland. Soon after, he shortened the "Psychological" moniker to "Logic".Following these introductory experiences, Logic released his first official mixtape, Young, Broke & Infamous, on December 15, 2010. The mixtape was well received by critics and was the genesis for Logic to establish an early following. Chris Zarou, the president of Visionary Music Group, heard the mixtape and signed Logic to the independent label. Upon signing, Logic stated in an interview, "Visionary Music Group is like Roc-A-Fella. Damon Dash, that's like Chris Zarou of Visionary Music Group, I like to see myself as a Jay. In no way am I arrogant or cocky, I have to see it in order to do it. They did it independent and when they signed with a major, they did it the way that they wanted to do it". The mixtape was confirmed to have been downloaded over 300,000 times on online mixtape sharing platform DatPiff. Logic released his second mixtape, Young Sinatra, in 2011. It serves as the first installment in the Young Sinatra chronology, and the mixtape received critical acclaim from various publications, including XXL. The music video for "All I Do", released on YouTube, gained over a million views in the week following its release.After the success of his previous two projects, Logic released his third mixtape Young Sinatra: Undeniable on April 30, 2012. The mixtape is notable for Logic addressing various personal topics, including his future, his father's drug use, his expulsion from school, and his mother getting stabbed. Speaking about the mixtape, Logic said, "Fans tend to think that if you fall in love with an artist because he makes this kind of sound [but if he gets] bigger and he grows and [his sound changes, people also think he changes]. But with me, I created all types of sounds from the get-go, so you can never say I'm changing." He commented on the musical aspects of the mixtape, stating, "There's stuff on there for the motherf***ers that don't pay attention to lyrics and just want to have fun, but every line is constructed with such depth that the real lyricists and nitpickers have something to listen to." After the release of Young Sinatra: Undeniable, Logic completed his first national headlining tour, the Visionary Music Group Tour.


=== 2012–2013: Young Sinatra: Welcome to Forever and recording contract ===
In early 2013, Logic was featured in an edition of XXL, being included as a part of the publication's annual "Top 10 Freshmen List", alongside artists Travis Scott, Trinidad James, Dizzy Wright, Action Bronson, Joey Badass, Angel Haze, Ab-Soul, Chief Keef, Kirko Bangz and Schoolboy Q. Logic completed his first European tour in March 2013, and confirmed his fourth mixtape, Young Sinatra: Welcome to Forever, would be released on May 7. He announced his second headlining national tour, the two-month-long Welcome to Forever Tour, to promote the project. The mixtape was a critical success, with critics praising the project, calling it a "free album", as well as noting the rapper's rapid growth and adaptability. The mixtape has received over 900,000 downloads on DatPiff since its release.On April 15, it was announced that Logic had signed with Def Jam Recordings, with Def Jam producer No I.D. serving as the executive producer of his debut album. Logic released a public statement about the signing, stating, "I'm excited to take this next step in my career. It's incredible for Def Jam [Records] and Visionary Music Group to work together, and the opportunity to collaborate [with No I.D.] is priceless. I'm very humbled to be a part of the most iconic hip hop label of all time." Logic toured with Kid Cudi, fellow Def Jam signee Big Sean, and Tyler, the Creator on "The Cud Life Tour 2013", throughout the fall of the year.


=== 2013–2014: Under Pressure ===

On November 5, Logic revealed that No I.D., former GOOD Music producer Hit-Boy, RattPack member 6ix, and C-Sick would be providing production on his debut record, with No I.D. and 6ix serving as executive producers for the album. On January 27, 2014, Visionary Music Group released the song "24 Freestyle". The song was released in celebration of Logic's birthday and serves as the first noted collaboration between all VMG artists. On February 11, Logic announced that he would be touring alongside EDM band Krewella on the 2014 Verge Campus Spring Tour. On April 8, Logic released "Now", originally scheduled to be featured on his upcoming free EP titled While You Wait. Logic embarked on the month-long While You Wait Tour alongside fellow Visionary Music Group member Quest. On April 22, he released "Alright", the third song from the While You Wait project, and features Big Sean. Logic concluded the four-track project, releasing "Finding Forever" on May 7.In summer 2014, Logic announced that no featured artists would appear on his debut album, making it "personal [to Logic] and focused on only me". On August 27, Logic released "Driving Ms. Daisy", featuring Childish Gambino. September brought the announcements of his album title and release date, October 21. The title track, serving as the album's primary single, was released on September 15. On October 14, Logic released the second single titled "Buried Alive", which was the final single to be released as promotion for the album. On October 21, Logic released Under Pressure, selling over 70,000 copies in its first week after debuting at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart.On November 12, Logic made his network television debut on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon by performing "I'm Gone" alongside the Roots, 6ix, and DJ Rhetorik.


=== 2015–2016: The Incredible True Story and Bobby Tarantino ===

On September 8, Logic released the trailer for his upcoming second studio album, announcing that the album will be released in the fall of 2015 and is considered a "motion picture sci-fi epic". The story, which takes places 100 years into the future, begins with Earth being uninhabitable due to severe human intervention. The primary characters begin traveling to a new planet called Paradise and as they travel, they play The Incredible True Story. It features Logic, Steven Blum (as Thomas), Kevin Randolph (as Kai), and Anna Elyse Palchikoff (as Thalia) as main characters, and the cast took part in a panel discussion to promote and talk about the album at New York Comic Con. Logic, Blum, Randolph, and 6ix returned to New York Comic Con in 2016 to discuss "life after The Incredible True Story.On September 22, 2015, Logic released "Young Jesus", the lead single from the album, featuring longtime friend Big Lenbo. "Like Woah" and "Fade Away", the second and third singles from the album, were released on October 14 and November 5, respectively. The Incredible True Story was released on November 13, 2015, surpassing his debut album on the Billboard 200, debuting at number three with a combined first-week sales of 135,000. The album also topped the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums at number one. It was also the second Logic commercial release to gain widespread critical acclaim. Logic announced The Incredible World Tour, taking place in spring 2016. After the conclusion of The Incredible World Tour, it was revealed that Logic and rapper G-Eazy would be co-headlining The Endless Summer Tour, a nationwide tour, together in summer 2016. Rappers YG and Yo Gotti would be the supporting acts. Two weeks ahead of the start of the tour, Logic released the song, "Flexicution" on June 14, 2016, a song that he teased on social media for months which featured Jessica Andrea on the latter end of the song, where she provides backing vocals. The song peaked at number 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, becoming his first song to chart on the Hot 100. He was later featured on the song, "Sucker for Pain" with Lil Wayne, Wiz Khalifa, Imagine Dragons, Ty Dolla Sign and X Ambassadors on June 24. The song was a part of the soundtrack for the 2016 movie, Suicide Squad, peaking at number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. "Wrist" was released on the same day and features vocals from Pusha T.On July 1, 2016, Logic released a mixtape titled Bobby Tarantino. It was Logic's fifth mixtape, and his first since 2013 and was released unexpectedly via his Twitter account. The mixtape included the singles: "Flexicution" and "Wrist" and peaked at number 12 on the US Billboard 200 chart.On October 3, 2016, Logic revealed the original title of his third studio album to be AfricAryaN, stating that "It's about me being black and white, and seeing life from two sides. [It's about] the cultural evolution and how you can go from the darkest of skin to the lightest of skin […] At the end of the day, we all have so many different ethnicities in our blood, no matter how pure we think we are".


=== 2017–2018: Everybody, Bobby Tarantino II and YSIV ===

On March 29, 2017, Logic revealed the new title of his album titled, Everybody. The news of his third album was shared and revealed publicly on Logic's social media accounts in the form of videos revealing the official album cover designed and painted by Sam Spratt and directed by Andy Hines. The album was released on May 5, 2017 and included three singles: The title track, "Black Spiderman" featuring Damian Lemar Hudson, and "1-800-273-8255" featuring Alessia Cara and Khalid.Everybody debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 with 247,000 album-equivalent units, of which 196,000 were pure album sales. However, the album also set the record for largest second week drop of all time, as pure sales fell 96% to just 8,000 copies. The third single from the album, "1-800-273-8255", a song created in association with the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline was certified platinum 5× by the RIAA and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and in the top 10 in various other countries. In August 2017, Logic guest starred in the animated comedy series Rick and Morty, voicing himself as the headliner of a festival. In November 2017, Logic released the song "Broken People" with Rag'n'Bone Man as part of the Bright soundtrack.On February 23, 2018, Logic released a single titled "44 More". It was a sequel to "44 Bars", a song from Logic's 2016 mixtape Bobby Tarantino. The song peaked at number 22 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. The following single, "Overnight", was released four days later on February 27. Logic would eventually release another single titled "Everyday", with record producer Marshmello on March 2. Logic would later announce his sixth mixtape titled Bobby Tarantino II, with a promotional video featuring the characters of Rick and Morty, on March 7. Bobby Tarantino II was released on March 9, 2018, through Def Jam and Visionary Music Group and featured guest appearances from 2 Chainz, Big Sean, and Wiz Khalifa. It debuted at number one in the US, becoming his second consecutive number-one album in the US. On March 30, he was featured in the premier episode of Netflix's original documentary series, Rapture.On September 28, 2018, Logic released his fourth studio album titled, YSIV. Before releasing the project, Logic released three singles: "One Day" featuring Ryan Tedder, "The Return" and "Everybody Dies". The album features the song “Wu Tang Forever” which features all the surviving members of the Wu-Tang Clan. Logic later announced that he was writing a novel and said that he has written and plans to star in his own movie, which he's began to work on.


=== 2019–2021: Supermarket, Confessions of a Dangerous Mind, No Pressure, and retirement ===

On January 18, 2019, Logic released the lead single to his then upcoming fifth studio album titled, "Keanu Reeves". Unlike his previous work, Logic went on to release, Supermarket, a novel written by himself and an accompanying soundtrack with it on March 26, 2019, expanding his musical abilities, with alternative rock. While being the first rapper to become a New York Times' number one best-selling author with his novel, the accompanying soundtrack received negative reviews from critics, peaking at number 56 on the US Billboard 200. On March 19, Logic announced his fifth studio album, Confessions of a Dangerous Mind, with its title track and soon after, on April 11, he was cast in an undisclosed role in the video game The Last of Us Part II. The album's third single, "Homicide", was released on May 3, and featured a guest verse from Eminem. The song peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and in the top 10 in various other countries. The album was released on May 10 and debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, making it his third album to reach the top of the chart.On July 16, 2020, Logic announced that his sixth album, No Pressure, will be his last as he is retiring from rapping to focus on being a father. The album was released on July 24, 2020, and was described as the sequel to his 2014 debut album, Under Pressure. On July 24, Logic started streaming full-time after signing an exclusive deal with Twitch. On Twitch, he mainly produces beats, chats with fans, and plays video games. He played video games with media influencers like PewDiePie, MrBeast, Valkyrae, Pokimane, Jacksepticeye, Corpse Husband and Sykkuno.
His first stream was the album-listening party to No Pressure. He made his "Grammy" speech on the stream because he thought he would never get nominated, and thanked Drake, Kendrick Lamar, 6ix, A$AP Ferg (and A$AP Mob as a whole), J. Cole and Toro y Moi.


=== 2021–present: Return to music, Memoir, and Bobby Tarantino III ===
On March 20, 2021, Logic announced preorders for his memoir, This Bright Future. It is set to be released on September 7. On April 23, Logic's YouTube channel BobbysWorld uploaded a song entitled "Mars Only Pt. 3", a collaboration between him and producer Madlib. Together, the duo is called Madgic, a portmanteau of their names. The duo has released two more songs, "Raddest Dad" and "Mafia Music" in the same way. 
On June 16, Logic announced a return to music, mimicking the statement issued by Michael Jordan upon his return to basketball. On June 18, he released the song "Intro", his first since returning to music, and over the following month he would release a series of singles presumed to be a part of an upcoming project. He released his seventh mixtape, Bobby Tarantino III, on July 30, 2021, which included 4 out of 5 of the singles released during the previous month ("Intro" was not included in the mixtape).In 2022, Logic will be a guest star in the upcoming animated series The Legend of Vox Machina.


== Personal life ==
In 2013, Logic stated that while growing up, he smoked marijuana. Logic was addicted to cigarettes, dedicating the song "Nikki" from Under Pressure to the subject. He speaks about smoking since he was 13 and that, when giving up marijuana and alcohol, he could not overcome the addiction until 2014. He pledged not to smoke another cigarette after the release of Under Pressure.On October 22, 2015, Logic married Jessica Andrea, a singer and his then-girlfriend of two years. In March 2018, he announced their separation, and filed for divorce the following month. Nevertheless, they remain friends and did not cite anger as the reason for their split. Logic married Brittney Noell in September 2019. They have one son.Logic also has a YouTube channel where he posts videos about his favorite video games.


== Artistry ==

Logic cites Frank Sinatra as his main inspiration. Sinatra's influence can be seen in several aspects of Logic's persona, with Logic having the "RattPack" (a play on Sinatra's "Rat Pack" and an acronym for "Real All the Time"). The group initially consisted of Logic's manager Christian Zarou, executive producer 6ix, and rappers C Dot Castro and Big Lenbo. He also describes his female fans as "BobbySoxers", as well as referring to himself as "Young Sinatra". As a child, his mother made him watch old black and white movies, which formed his love for the singer. Logic cites Sinatra as instrumental to him being able to carry and articulate himself the way he does, with Logic describing him as an individual who "showcased peace, love, grace, positivity, honor, and valor".Logic has said that various forms of entertainment across many platforms have influenced him, including A Tribe Called Quest, Mos Def, Outkast, Red Hot Chili Peppers, J. Cole, Drake, Eminem, the Wu-Tang Clan, and films by Quentin Tarantino. In an interview with XXL, Logic stated, "I love all subgenres within hip-hop and all genres of music, and I think that's what allows me to make the music that I do, because of my appreciation for the music."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Under Pressure (2014)
The Incredible True Story (2015)
Everybody (2017)
YSIV (2018)
Confessions of a Dangerous Mind (2019)
No Pressure (2020)
Vinyl Days (2022)


== Tours ==
HeadliningUnder Pressure Tour (2015)
The Incredible World Tour (2016)
Everybody's Tour (2017)
Bobby Tarantino vs. Everybody Tour (2018)
Confessions of a Dangerous Mind Tour (2019)Co-HeadliningEndless Summer Tour  (with G-Eazy) (2016)SupportingThe Cud Life Tour  (with Kid Cudi) (2013)


== Awards and nominations ==
‡ Note: shared with other four nominees.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Former website (archived)