Sverre Gjørvad (born 26 October 1966 in Stathelle, Norway) is a Norwegian jazz musician (drums) and composer. He is known for participating in establishing the SoddJazz festival and recording with various notable musicians including Live Maria Roggen, Ståle Storløkken, Mats Eilertsen and Nils-Olav Johansen.


== Career ==
Gjørvad studied jazz at Trondheim Musikkonservatorium, while performing with Bodega Band and Storytellers, with Nils-Olav Johansen (guitar) and Svein Folkvord (bass). Storytellers released their album Enjoy Storytellers! in 1994. He has performed with Dingobats, along with Eirik Hegdal (saxophone), Njål Ølnes (saxophone), Thomas T. Dahl (guitar), and Mats Eilertsen (bass). As regional musician in Nord-Trøndelag, Gjørvad taught music and composed the work Jazz Pathetique for the SoddJazz festival in 1999.In 2001, Gjørvad debuted as a solo artist on the album, Denne lille pytten er et hav. Ten years later, he released his second solo album Patience For The Little Things.In 2004, Gjørvad collaborated with Richard Badendyck (piano and vocals) on the album That's All. He worked under the direction of producer and arranger, Odd Riisnæs (saxophonist), along with a large string group and band whose members included Stig Hvalryg (bass), and "Junior" Dag Richard Badendyck (guitar). This album together with his solo albums has received great reviews in the Norwegian music press. Gjørvad established a quartet with Rob Waring (vibraphone), Bjørn Klakegg (guitar), and  Mats Eilertsen.In 2006, Gjørvad moved to Hammerfest, where he currently works as producer for the Arctic Cultural Centre.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
2001: Denne lille pytten er et hav (Curling Legs), texts by Jan Kjærstad (Forføren and Speil) and novels by Peter Handke, which featured Live Maria Roggen (vocals), Ståle Storløkken (keyboards), Nils-Olav Johansen (guitar), Mats Eilertsen (bass), and Øyvind Brekke (trombone).
2011: Patience For The Little Things (Reflect Records), with Siri Gjære, Ståle Storløkken, Mark Fransman, Brydon Bolton, Gorm Helfjord, and Melanie Scholtz.
2019: Voi River (Losen Records), with Herborg Rundberg, Kristian Olstad and Dag Okstad.
2020: Elegy of Skies (Losen Records), with Herborg Rundberg, Kristian Olstad, Dag Okstad and Joakim Milder.
2021: Time To Illuminate Earth (Losen Records), with Herborg Rundberg, Kristian Olstad, Dag Okstad and Embrik Snerte.


=== Collaborations ===
With Epinastic Movements1994: Rapid (Pop Eye)With Storytellers1994: Enjoy Storytellers! (Curling Legs)With Dingobats1998: The New Dingobats Generation (Turn Left Productions)
2002: Pöck (Bergland Productions)
2004: Follow (Jazzaway Records)With Kjellerbandet1999: Kjellerbandet På Plate ()With Richard Badendyck2004: That's All (Jazzavdelingen)With Jienat2010: Mira (Jienat)With Ivar Thomassen2011: Særlig Når Timan E Blå (Reflect)


== References ==