Darian Cowgill (born November 7, 1972, Pasadena, California, United States), is an American mix engineer, mastering engineer and record producer.


== Career ==
Darian is an independent mix engineer and co-owner of The Den Recorders, a recording studio located in Pasadena, California, with Josh Young, his Emmy Award-nominated business partner.  The Den Recorders has been operational since its inception in late 1999.  The duo of Darian and Josh also operates Atrium Music, a music licensing an publishing firm that focuses its continually growing music library of composers and independent artists for placement in television, film and other broadcast media opportunities.
Darian initially started his musical career with the Pasadena Boys Choir as a youngster, followed by theater performances, live sound and various bands. He then decided to explore the other side of the studio glass and earned a degree in recording engineering, which he has used to produce (in conjunction with The Den Recorders) over 200 artists to date. In 1998, he began an internship with Warped Tour creator, Kevin Lyman. His work in national and international terrestrial radio began while working as a content producer and production director for Pyramid Radio from 2005 until 2009, under former Radio legend and then CBS president, Steve Rivers and former owner of Boston's Kiss 108 Richie Balsbaugh. Darian was Steve Rivers last production director before his passing.  He has continued working as a mix engineer for Los Angeles Burbank based independent radio syndication company Radio Express... where he continues to mix and produce multiple international top 20 count-down radio format and mix format shows weekly including The World Chart Show with Lara Scott and The World Chart Show with PJ Butta. also the Airtel sponsored syndicated English and French shows for Africa.
He served as an independent record producer and engineer for American rock band, Oedipus. He has also worked with a number of other bands including Producing, Editing, Mixing, or Mastering for such bands as Middle Class Rut, Beware of Darkness, Flagship, Zen Robbi, Katastro, The Graves, Kevin Sandbloom, Jonny Santos, Rafael Moreira, When in Rome, Jimmy Gnecco and Sleeping Giant.
In addition to mixing and producing individual single release songs for artists, complete albums, radio shows, television/film projects, and commercial broadcast content.  He is also a current and continued professor of Digital Audio Technology and an AVID Certified Pro Tools instructor with the Citrus College Recording Arts program in Glendora, California.


== Awards and accolades ==
Cowgill was the Grand Prize winner of a Pensado's Place sponsored Indaba Music mix contest, for "Muffaletta" on Billy Martin's 2013, Heels Over Head album. Subsequently, Cowgill was interviewed by Dave Pensado on his weekly show, "Pensado's Place", regarding his victory.
He acted as the producer on the "Get Your Music in Film and TV" panel at the 32nd Westcoast Songwriter's Conference held in Los Altos, California. He was elected to the board of directors for Westcoastsongwriters.org in June 2014 and will continue to be a guest speaker for the music production, mixing and mastering seminars.
Darian is also an AVID certified Pro Tools instructor. He also endorses Slate Digital, THD Electronics, Dean Markley Strings and Mesa Boogie.


== Partial discography ==


=== Mix engineer ===
Airtel World Chart Show
Billy Martin – Wicked Knee
Heineken World Chart Show
Vicious Little Smile by Oedipus
One California Day
Rocket 21
Sleeping Giant
The Big Pill
Wait
Women in Film
World Chart Show Urban


=== Mastering engineer ===
Beware of Darkness
Flagship
Jelly of the Month Club
Jimmy Gnecco
Middle Class Rut
Zen Robbi
Cheerleader


=== Voice-over ===
Advance Auto Parts
Body Worlds Chicago
Bed, Bath & Beyond
CVS Pharmacy
Disney Orlando
Estée Lauder
Finishline
HomeGoods
Knott's Berry Farm
Logan International Airport
Longs Drugs
Marshalls
Massachusetts State Lotto
MTV
Petro Express
Rocket 21
Sony Music
Staples
Telemundo 34
T.J. Maxx
Tulsa International Airport
Unilever Sun Silk
Val Surf


== References ==