Karla Camila Cabello Estrabao (; American Spanish: [kaˈmila kaˈβeʝo]; born March 3, 1997) is a Cuban-born American singer and songwriter. She rose to prominence as a member of the girl group Fifth Harmony. While in Fifth Harmony, Cabello began to establish herself as a solo artist with the release of the collaborations "I Know What You Did Last Summer" with Shawn Mendes and "Bad Things" with Machine Gun Kelly, the latter reaching number four on the US Billboard Hot 100. Camila left the group in late 2016, and released several other collaborations, including "Hey Ma" with Pitbull and J Balvin for The Fate of the Furious soundtrack (2017) and "Crying in the Club".
Cabello released her debut studio album, Camila in 2018 and peaked at number one on the US Billboard 200. The Latin music–influenced pop album was well-received critically and earned a Platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Its lead single "Havana" topped charts in several countries, including the US and UK, and the follow-up single "Never Be the Same" reached the top ten in multiple countries. Cabello's 2019 duet with Mendes, "Señorita", became her second single to top the Billboard Hot 100. Her second studio album, Romance (2019), peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 chart and at number one in Canada.
In 2021 Cabello made her acting debut, starring as the title character from the film Cinderella. Cabello is expected to release her third studio album Familia in 2022, with the lead single "Don't Go Yet" being released in July 2021 alongside the announcement of the albums title. Cabello has amassed billions of streams on music platforms, and "Havana" became the best-selling digital single of 2018, according to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI). Cabello's many awards include two Latin Grammy Awards, five American Music Awards, and one Billboard Music Award. In October 2021 "Havana" was certified Diamond by the RIAA, making Cabello the first Hispanic woman to receive this certification.


== Early life and education ==
Cabello was born in Havana, Cuba, to Sinuhe Estrabao and Alejandro Cabello. She grew up in the town of Cojímar in East Havana. Her father was born in Mexico City and is a Mexican who moved to Cuba. She has a younger sister named Sofia. For most of her early life, Cabello and her family moved back and forth between Havana and Mexico City. When Cabello was six years old, she relocated to Miami, Florida, in the United States, with her mother; her father was unable to obtain a visa at the time and joined the family approximately 18 months later. Cabello acquired American citizenship in 2008. She attended Miami Palmetto High School but left during the 2012–2013 school year while she was in 9th grade to pursue her singing career. She later earned her high school diploma.


== Career ==


=== 2012–2016: The X Factor and Fifth Harmony ===

Camila Cabello auditioned for the TV talent competition show The X Factor in Greensboro, North Carolina with Aretha Franklin's "Respect"; however, her audition was not aired because the series did not get the rights for the song. After elimination during the "bootcamp" portion of the process in Miami, Florida, Cabello was called back to the stage along with other contestants Ally Brooke, Normani, Lauren Jauregui, and Dinah Jane to form the girl group that would later become known as Fifth Harmony. After finishing in third place on the show, they signed a joint deal with Syco Music, owned by Simon Cowell, and Epic Records, L.A. Reid's record label.The group released the EP Better Together (2013) along with the studio albums Reflection (2015) and 7/27 (2016). The latter two generated the singles "Worth It" and "Work from Home", respectively, which reached the top 10 in several international charts. From 2013 through the end of 2016, Cabello performed in various tours with Fifth Harmony.
In November 2015, Cabello collaborated with Canadian singer Shawn Mendes on a duet titled "I Know What You Did Last Summer", a song they wrote together. The single charted at number 20 in the US and 18 in Canada and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). On October 14, 2016, American rapper Machine Gun Kelly released a joint single with Cabello called "Bad Things", which reached a peak of number four on the US Billboard Hot 100 songs chart. Also that year, Time magazine included Cabello on "The 25 Most Influential Teens of 2016" list.On December 18, 2016, Fifth Harmony announced Cabello's departure, with both sides giving contradictory explanations of the circumstances for her exit. She appeared in a previously taped performance with the group on Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve at the end of 2016. Writing about Cabello's time in the group, a Billboard journalist noted it is "rather uncommon for someone to stand out in a collective as much as Cabello has over the past years."


=== 2017–2018: Breakthrough with Camila ===
On January 25, 2017, "Love Incredible", a collaboration with Norwegian DJ Cashmere Cat, leaked online. The official version of the song was released on February 16, and later featured on Cashmere's debut studio album, 9 (2017). Cabello also recorded "Hey Ma" with rappers Pitbull and J Balvin for The Fate of the Furious soundtrack (2017). The Spanish version of the single and its music video were released on March 10, 2017, and the English version was released on April 6. The singer was also featured on a collaboration with Major Lazer, Travis Scott and Quavo for the song "Know No Better".In May 2017, Cabello announced the future release of her first studio album, at the time titled The Hurting. The Healing. The Loving., which she described as "the story of my journey from darkness into light, from a time when I was lost to a time when I found myself again". Her debut solo single "Crying in the Club" was released on May 19, 2017, followed by a performance at the 2017 Billboard Music Awards. The single peaked at number 47 in the United States. She joined Bruno Mars' 24K Magic World Tour as an opening act for several shows in 2017 and partnered with clothing brand Guess as the face for their 2017 Fall campaign.New writing and recording sessions for her album, influenced by the success of her single "Havana" featuring Young Thug, postponed the album's original release date. The single reached number one in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, France, Hungary and the United States. It also spent seven weeks atop the US Mainstream Top 40 airplay chart. The song became Spotify's most-streamed song ever by a solo female artist in June 2018, with over 888 million streams at the time. Titled Camila, her debut album is a pop record containing Latin-influenced songs and ballads. Camila was released on January 12, 2018, and debuted at number one in the United States with 119,000 album-equivalent units, including 65,000 from pure album sales. The album was eventually certified platinum in the country. "Real Friends" and "Never Be the Same" were released in the same day on December 7, 2017; the latter becoming her third top 10 entry on the Hot 100, peaking at Number 6. "Havana" and "Never Be the Same" made Cabello the first artist to top the Mainstream Top 40 and Adult Top 40 airplay charts with the first two singles from a debut studio album. She later won a MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year for "Havana".

In April 2018, Cabello embarked on the Never Be the Same Tour, her first headlining concert tour as a solo artist. She was featured in "Sangria Wine", a song she recorded with Pharrell Williams. Cabello released the song live during the tour. In May 2018, Cabello made a cameo appearance in Maroon 5's music video for "Girls Like You". In the same month, she began performing as the opening act for American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift in her Reputation Stadium Tour in between the European leg of the Never Be the Same Tour. She headlined an arena for the first time on July 31, 2018, at the Mohegan Sun Arena in Uncasville, Connecticut. Cabello was featured in the remix version of "Beautiful", a song from American singer Bazzi. The remix was released on August 2. On October 9, 2018, Cabello released the video single "Consequences", having first surprised 12 of her biggest fans in advance with a "Most Amazing Mystery Gift & Personal Letter".In December 2018, she was nominated for two Grammys: Best Pop Solo Performance for a live version of "Havana" and Best Pop Vocal Album for Camila. Her performance of "Havana" with guests Ricky Martin, J Balvin and Young Thug at the start of the ceremony made her the first female Latin artist to open the show.


=== 2019–2020: Romance ===
In October 2018, Cabello announced she would start working on new music in the new year after the holidays. In April 2019, it was announced that Cabello would star in an upcoming film adaptation of Cinderella, directed by Kay Cannon for Sony Pictures.On June 21, 2019, Cabello released "Señorita" with Canadian singer Shawn Mendes, along with the music video. The song debuted at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and marked Mendes' and Cabello's second collaboration, following "I Know What You Did Last Summer" (2015). In August, "Señorita" climbed to the number one position on the Hot 100, making it Cabello's second single to top the chart. "Señorita" reached Number 1 in over 30 countries. It earned a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. According to the IFPI, "Señorita" was the third best-selling song of 2019 globally, and is currently the 9th most streamed song on Spotify as of November 2021. She also recorded the song "South of the Border" with British singer-songwriter Ed Sheeran and American rapper Cardi B, which was released in July 2019 and reached Number 4 on the UK Singles Chart.On September 1, 2019, Cabello posted a clip on Instagram, teasing the release of her second studio album Romance. Two days later, she announced the first two singles from the album, "Liar" and "Shameless", which were released on September 5, followed by "Cry for Me" and "Easy" in October 2019. Romance was released on December 6, 2019, and was supposed to be supported by the Romance Tour in 2020 until its cancelation due to the COVID-19 pandemic. "Living Proof" was released with the pre-orders of the album on November 15, 2019. Romance debuted and peaked at Number 3 on the US Billboard 200 and reached Number 1 in Canada it also reached the top 10 in 12 countries, including Australia, New Zealand and Spain. "My Oh My" featuring DaBaby entered the top 20 on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at Number 12, it also peaked at Number 1 on US Mainstream Top 40.In mid-March 2020, Cabello participated in iHeart Media's Living Room Concert for America, a benefit to raise awareness and funds for the COVID-19 pandemic.


=== 2021–present: Cinderella and Familia ===
On July 23, 2021, Cabello released "Don't Go Yet" as the lead single from her third studio album Familia, announced alongside the release of the single. On October 15, 2021, Cabello premiered "La Buena Vida", from Familia, during her NPR Tiny Desk Concert. On October 29, 2021, Cabello released "Oh Na Na" with Myke Towers and Tainy. It is currently unclear whether the song is intended for Cabello's album Familia or Towers' and Tainy's future projects. Familia is expected to be released in 2022, and was named by Forbes as one of the most anticipated pop albums of 2022. Cabello has confirmed collaborations with Maria Becerra and Ed Sheeran for 2022, but it is unclear whether these will be featured on Familia.
In early-September, Cabello performed "Don't Go Yet" at the BCC Live Lounge, she also performed a cover of Olivia Rodrigo's "good 4 u" which was later nominated for an iHeartRadio Music Award.In the latter half of 2021 Cabello appeared in an adaptation of Cinderella, which was released in select theatres and digitally on Amazon Prime Video on September 3, 2021 Cinderella was the most-watched streaming movie over the Labour Day weekend, as well as the most-watched movie musical yet in 2021. The film received mixed reviews from critics, though Cabello's performance received favourable reviews. Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 3 out of 4 stars and praised Cabello for her performance, saying "she has a real knack for comedy", and IndieWire remarked 'In her cinematic debut, the pop star stitches up a charming performance in an oft-told fairy tale'. In an interview with The One Show in July, Cabello said she would like to continue acting.In November 2021, Cabello released an Amazon Exclusive of the Bing Crosby song "I'll Be Home for Christmas", it reached Number 2 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100, before peaking at Number 71 on the Billboard Hot 100, it is the highest charting cover version of the song to date on the Hot 100. It also peaked at Number 58 on the Billboard Holiday 100 and Number 24 on the UK Singles Chart, marking Cabello's 13th Top 40 hit in the UK. Cabello performed the single at the Michael Bublé's Christmas in the City special on NBC and for PBS' In Performance at The White House: Spirit of the Season.On December 6, 2021, it was announced that Cabello will open for Coldplay during the Latin American leg of their Music of the Spheres World Tour in September 2022, she is expected to open for them in Colombia, Peru and Chile. She is also slated to perform at Rock in Rio that same month.


== Artistry ==
Primarily a pop singer, Cabello possesses a soprano vocal range. She grew up listening to artists such as Alejandro Fernández and Celia Cruz. Her debut studio album is a pop record, influenced by Latin music. The album incorporates elements of reggaeton, hip hop, and dancehall and took inspiration from contemporary Latin artists such as Calle 13 and J Balvin, as well as from the songwriting of Taylor Swift and Ed Sheeran. Her sophomore album was inspired by the "big sounds" of the 80s and Queen. She has also cited Michael Jackson, Rihanna, Shakira, Alejandro Sanz, David Bisbal, Alejandro Fernández, Maná, Beyoncé, John Mayer, Demi Lovato and Eminem as influences.


== Philanthropy ==
In February 2016, Cabello announced she had partnered with Save the Children to design a limited-edition "Love Only" T-shirt to help raise awareness of issues involving girls' equal access to education, health care and opportunities to succeed. In June 2016, Cabello, producer Benny Blanco, and members of the nonprofit arts organization OMG Everywhere helped to create the charity single "Power in Me". Cabello has also partnered with the Children's Health Fund, a non-profit dedicated to providing health care to low-income families with children.On April 3, 2017, Cabello performed at Zedd's WELCOME! Fundraising Concert which raised money for ACLU. Cabello sang to patients at UCLA Mattel Children's Hospital on May 8, 2017. In late 2017, she joined Lin-Manuel Miranda and multiple other Latin artists on the song "Almost Like Praying" for Puerto Rico hurricane relief. Cabello also announced she was donating all proceeds of "Havana" to the ACLU for DREAMers.Cabello donated portions of proceeds from VIP sale packages to the Children's Health Fund while on the 2018 Never Be the Same tour. On July 13, 2018, she performed a concert in San Juan and donated a portion of the concert's proceeds to Hurricane Maria Relief Fund. In November 2018, Cabello became an ambassador for Save the Children.In March 2019, Cabello announced she donated $10,000 to a GoFundMe campaign for a homeless immigrant. In September 2019, Cabello pledged to raise $250,000 for Save the Children organization. In October 2019, Cabello performed at the We Can Survive concert which donates to breast cancer. On October 22, 2019, Cabello appeared with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge at Kensington Palace in support of the finalists for the BBC Radio 1 Teen Heroes Awards.In March 2020, Cabello participated in iHeart Media's Living Room Concert for America, a benefit to raise awareness and funds for the COVID-19 pandemic. In March and April 2020, Cabello participated in Global Citizen Festival's Together at Home virtual concert to raise awareness and funds for the COVID-19 pandemic. In May 2020, Cabello, alongside Shawn Mendes, joined protests in Miami for racial justice after the murder of George Floyd. In July 2021, she expressed support for the 2021 Cuban protests against the country's government.In January 2021 Cabello partnered with the nonprofit Movement Voter Fund to launch The Healing Justice project, a project to identify ten organizations to receive grants to pay for mental health resources for their frontline workers. Cabello pledged the seed money for the venture totally $250,000 and has pledged to continue to support the project going forward. So far the project has given grants to several organisations, including Muslin Woman For, Freedom Inc and QLatinx.Cabello is an outspoken advocate for climate change, and regularly speaks about this on her social media and in interviews. In September 2021 Cabello recruited over 60 artists to sign an open letter to several entertainment companies including Amazon, Facebook and Apple, calling on them to ask Congress to pass the climate action that President Biden called for in his Build Back Better agenda.


== Awards and nominations ==

Among her awards, Cabello has won two Latin Grammy Awards, four American Music Awards, a Billboard Music Award, five MTV Europe Music Awards, two iHeartRadio Music Awards, four MTV Video Music Awards (including one for Video of the Year), three iHeartRadio Much Music Video Awards, and a Billboard Women in Music award for Breakthrough Artist.


== Personal life ==
Cabello was in a relationship with dating coach and writer Matthew Hussey, whom she met on the set of The Today Show. They dated from February 2018 to June 2019. She began dating Canadian singer Shawn Mendes in July 2019. The relationship caused controversy, as both were accused of attempting to form a relationship for publicity, while Mendes denied it stating it is "definitely not a publicity stunt". The relationship was confirmed after the release of their song "Señorita". In November 2021, Cabello and Mendes announced their breakup via Instagram.Cabello has anxiety and obsessive–compulsive disorder.Cabello purchased a 3,500-square-foot (330 m2) home in the Hollywood Hills neighborhood of Los Angeles in 2019. In December 2021, it was reported that she sold the home for $4.3 million.In December 2019, Tumblr posts that Cabello had reblogged between 2012 and 2013 surfaced on Twitter, containing racial slurs and derogatory language, including uses of the slur "nigger" and mocking Chris Brown's 2009 assault on Rihanna. Her Tumblr account was deleted soon afterward and Cabello issued an apology, stating that she was "uneducated and ignorant" when younger and that she was deeply embarrassed to have ever used "horrible and hurtful" language. She added that "those mistakes don't represent" her and that she "only [stands] and [has] ever stood for love and inclusivity". In March 2021, Cabello said she had taken part in weekly racial healing sessions administered by the racial equity group National Compadres Network, in which "you get corrected, you have homework, and you learn … Now I know better so I can do better".


== Discography ==

Camila (2018)
Romance (2019)
Familia (2022)


== Tours ==


=== Headlining ===
Never Be the Same Tour (2018)


=== Opening acts ===
Bruno Mars – 24K Magic World Tour (2017)
Taylor Swift – Reputation Stadium Tour (2018)
Coldplay – Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Web ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Camila Cabello at IMDb