Milton Nascimento (Portuguese pronunciation: ['miwtõ nasiˈmẽtu]; born October 26, 1942) is a Brazilian singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist, known globally as one of the most influential and talented Brazilian musicians. Elis Regina once stated that "if God had a voice, it would be Milton's."A unique and baroque voice combined with poetic lyrics, his music mesmerizes people all over the world. He has toured in North America, South America, Asia, Africa, and Europe. Nascimento is also highly praised in the music industry, having won five Grammy Awards, including Best World Music Album in 1997.


== Biography ==
Milton Nascimento was born in Rio de Janeiro. His mother, Maria Nascimento, was a maid. As a baby, Nascimento was adopted by a couple who were his mother's former employers; Josino Brito Campos, a bank employee, mathematics teacher and electronic technician and Lília Silva Campos, a music teacher and choir singer. When he was 18 months old, Nascimento's biological mother died, and he moved with his adoptive parents to the city of Três Pontas, in the state of Minas Gerais.
Nascimento was an occasional DJ on a radio station that his father once ran. He lived in the boroughs of Laranjeiras and Tijuca in Rio de Janeiro.
In the early stages of his career, Nascimento played in two samba groups, Evolussamba and Sambacana. In 1963, he moved to Belo Horizonte, where his friendship with Lô Borges led to the Clube da Esquina ("street corner club") movement. Members included Beto Guedes, Toninho Horta, Wagner Tiso, and Flávio Venturini, with whom he shared compositions and melodies.  One composition was "Canção do Sal", which was first interpreted by singer Elis Regina in 1966 and led to a television appearance with Nascimento. The collective, as well as some others, released Clube da Esquina in 1972. Several hit singles were also released.

Nascimento's compositions include songs such as  "Maria, Maria", "Canção da América" ("Song from America"/"Unencounter"), "Travessia" ("Bridges"), "Bailes da Vida", and "Coração de Estudante" ("Student's Heart"), a song about the funeral of Edson Luís, who was killed by police officers in 1968. The song became the hymn for the Diretas Já social-political campaign in 1984, was played at the funeral of the late President of Brazil Tancredo Neves the next year, and was also played at Ayrton Senna's funeral.
While his reputation within Brazil was firmly established with his Clube da Esquina works, Nascimento's international breakthrough came with his appearance on jazz saxophonist Wayne Shorter's 1974 album Native Dancer. This led to widespread acclaim, and collaborations with Paul Simon, Sarah Vaughan, Mercedes Sosa, Carlos Santana, Pablo Milanés, Cat Stevens, George Duke, Quincy Jones and Earth, Wind And Fire. Angelus (1994) features appearances by Pat Metheny, Ron Carter, Herbie Hancock, Jack DeJohnette, Nana Vasconcelos, Jon Anderson, James Taylor, and Peter Gabriel, among many others. Through his friendship with guitarist Warren Cuccurullo, Nascimento came to work with the pop rock band Duran Duran in 1993.  Nascimento co-wrote and performed the song "Breath After Breath", featured on the band's 1993 album Duran Duran. He also performed with the band in concert when they toured in Brazil in support of that album.
In 1996, Nascimento contributed the song "Dancing" to the AIDS benefit album Red Hot + Rio, produced by the Red Hot Organization.
In 2004, he worked with the Brazilian heavy metal band Angra, on the song "Late Redemption" from their album Temple of Shadows..Milton Nascimento was among hundreds of artists whose material was destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire.


== Discography ==

Compilations2000: Oratório
2004: Maria Maria / Ultimo Trem


== Academic title ==
Honorary doctorate of music, awarded by the Berklee College of Music, May 7, 2016.


== References ==


== Sources ==
Motta, Nelson (2001). Noites Tropicais (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Objetiva. ISBN 85-7302-292-2.
Dolores, Maria. (2006). Travessia: A Vida De Milton Nascimento (in Portuguese). RCB.
Mei, Giancarlo (2004). Canto Latino: Origine, Evoluzione e Protagonisti della Musica Popolare del Brasile. Preface by Sergio Bardotti; Afterword by Milton Nascimento. Viterbo, Italy: Stampa Alternativa-Nuovi Equilibri.
McGowan, Chris; Pessanha, Ricardo (1998). The Brazilian Sound: Samba, Bossa Nova and the Popular Music of Brazil (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Temple University Press. ISBN 1-56639-545-3.
Perrone, Charles A. Masters of Contemporary Brazilian Song: MPB 1965-1985. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1989. Chapter 4.


== External links ==
Milton Nascimento – official website
Milton Nascimento discography at Discogs 
Interview with Nascimento, 1988 (in Portuguese)
Milton Nascimento: 12 Essential Performances by Ted Gioia (jazz.com)