Sabah (Arabic: صباح‎ Ṣabāḥ  Lebanese pronunciation: [sˤɑˈbaːħ]; born Janet Gerges Feghali, جانيت جرجس فغالي; 10 November 1927 – 26 November 2014) was a Lebanese singer and actress. Nicknamed Shahruret-el Wadi, شحرورة الوادي, (meaning the Songbird of the Valley, based upon her region of origin, Wadi Chahrour also called Ourrouar) in the Arab world, she released over 50 albums and acted in 98 movies as well as over 20 Lebanese stage plays. She had a reported repertoire of over 3,500 songs. A Lebanese TV series named Al-Shahroura “الشحرورة” was made about her in 2011. She was among the first Arabic singers to perform at the Olympia in Paris, Carnegie Hall in New York City, the Royal Albert Hall in London and the Sydney Opera House. She is considered one of three Lebanese icons, along with Fairuz and Wadih El Safi, and was nicknamed "The Empress of the Lebanese Song" (Arabic: إمبراطورة الأغنية اللبنانية‎).


== Career ==

Sabah emerged at a time when the field of Arab singers was already crowded with formidable competitors. These included Najat Al Saghira (born 1938), Warda Al-Jazairia (1939–2012), Shadia (1931–2017), Fairuz (born 1934) and others.
Sabah released her first song in 1940 at the age of 15. She soon caught the eye of Egyptian film producer Asia Dagher, who immediately signed her for three films. The first of these, El-Qalb Luh Wahed (The Heart Has Its Reasons), released in 1945, made her a star and she became known by her character's name — Sabah — which is Arabic for the morning. She also acquired several affectionate nicknames, including "Chahroura" ("songbird") and "Sabbouha," a diminutive of Sabah. Among her most popular films were That's What Love Is (1961), Soft Hands (1964),Three Women (1968), Paris and Love (1972) and The Second Man (1959), in which she played a cabaret singer who vows to avenge her brother's death at the hands of a smuggling ring.

In her parallel music career, she recorded more than 3,000 songs, working with a string of legendary Egyptian composers, including the late Mohammed Abdel Wahab. She specialized in a Lebanese folk tradition called the mawal, and her most famous songs included "Zay el-Assal" ("Your Love is Like Honey on my Heart") and "Akhadou el-Reeh" ("They Took the Wind"). Sabah released over 50 albums and acted in 98 films during her career. Sabah's youthfulness and the joy she brought in her performances made her a living symbol of the "belle époque" and of the "joie de vivre" in the Levant and the Arab world.


== Personal life ==
Sabah was born to a Maronite Christian family in Bdadoun in Aley, she was also nicknamed Al Shahroura also called Ourrouar, a small town southeast of Beirut. She loved the Sasso's who she thought were the only genuine people around her. She came from a troubled family; her father physically abused her and tried to steal her early movie earnings. Her first marriage was to escape her father's control. Her brother also killed her mother because he believed she was having an affair.
She carried four different passports from four different countries: Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, and the United States. She married seven times, most notably to Egyptian actor Rushdy Abaza, as well as Lebanese businessman Najib Chammas, Egyptian musician Anwar Mansy, Egyptian television presenter Ahmed Farraj, Lebanese politician Youssef (Joe) Hammoud and Lebanese author-director Wassim Tabbara. Her last marriage was to the much-younger Lebanese artist Fadi Lubnan. She had two children, Sabah Chammas (from her marriage with Najib Chammas) and Howayda Mansy (from her marriage to Anwar Mansy). Sabah was a medical doctor in the United States and Howayda, a relatively well-known singer, actress and socialite. In her advanced age, she refused to leave the limelight, as well as her garish outfits. But she was unabashed: "I'm proud that I'm a village girl, but I had a lot of ambition," she said in 2008. Chady Maalouf, head of programming at Voice of Lebanon Radio said, "She broke so many taboos. I don't know if she was even aware of it... She was the example of a star, she was totally complete in her appearance, behavior and voice. She shocked people all the time."  It should be also added that she was known for her truly remarkable joie de vivre as she radiated to her public a sense of happiness and goodness in an embodiment of a belle époque in the modern Arab world! She lived many love stories, but she never found love. She said in one of her interviews that her ex-husbands usually called her "Mrs. Bank". They married her just because of her large fortune, and that's why none of her love relationships worked out successfully, to say nothing of how many times they cheated on her, e.g., Wassim Tabbara. Anwar Mansy allegedly was a poker addict and used to beat her as well. As for Najib Chammas, he wanted her to get away from the spotlights and become a housewife.In April 2008, a publication with supporting photos announced that she had married Joseph Gharib, her hair-dresser of 17 years. It was later revealed that she was only pulling an April Fools' Day joke on the public.Singer Sabah scores 9th husband to the 'married-to-Sabah-club'

After selling her house in Hazmieh, which was described by the Diva herself as "too big and cold for only one person", she moved to the neighboring Hotel Comfort in Baabda, Mount Lebanon, a hill city overlooking Beirut and the Mediterranean Sea, and later lived in another hotel next to Baabda. She suffered from many illnesses due to several thrombuses in her brain, leading to loss of control of her left hand and foot. Though her condition was severe, she maintained the utmost concentration, her memory remaining intact.
Until 2009, she performed both in concert and on television, including such programs as Star Academy (the Arabic equivalent of the United Kingdom's Fame Academy), where she sang her new single on stage opposite a line of mannequins displaying costumes from several of her early films and musicals. In the 1990s, she and her former husband Fadi Lubnan (Kuntar) made a documentary about her life, which aired on Future Television under the title "The Journey of My Life", (مشوار حياتي). She also developed a close collaboration with singer Rola Saad in remaking some of her old hits, such as "Yana Yana". The accompanying video, in which Sabah is shown as "the notorious diva" to whom her younger colleague pays tribute, has received wide play on Arabic music channels. Sabah was hosted on the TV show Akher Man Yalam on 31 May 2010. In the 2011 edition of the Beiteddine Art Festival, a show retracing the journey of Sabah as a singer and movie star was performed. In the title role, Rouwaida Attieh shared the stage with more than 40 singers and dancers to honor her works.
Sabah is the aunt of Brazilian congresswoman Jandira Feghali. Her brother Ricardo Feghali, is a musician and songwriter and is a member of the highly acclaimed Brazilian band Roupa Nova.


== Marriages ==
Sabah married nine times. Her husbands were:

Najeeb Shammas (father of her son, Dr. Sabah Shammas), she spent five years with him.
Khalid bin Saud bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, she spent several months with him then they got a divorce due to his family pressure.
Anwar Mansi (violin] Egyptian and father of her daughter Howaida), she spent four years with him.
Ahmed Farag (Announcer Egyptian and the marriage lasted three years.
The artist Rushdi Abaza, and she spent five months with him.
The artist Youssef Shaabanand the marriage lasted one month.
The member of Parliament Youssef Hammoud, and she spent two years with him.
The artist Wassim Tabbara, and she spent four years with him.
The artist Fadi Lebanon, and she spent seventeen years with him.A rumor spread after her divorce from Fadi Lebanon that she wanted to marry Mr. Lebanon “Omar Mahiou” when he was 25 years old. Later, she revealed that she fabricated the story of love and marriage to help him to be well-known. She believes that the majority of her husbands were taking advantage of her fame and wealth for their interests. She says that they call her “Madame Bank” because she spends money without thinking on the people she loves. She is known for her love of beauty and fashion and says I hope that if I lose my fortune, I do not lose my beauty and elegance.


== Death ==
Constant rumors involving Sabah's death had circulated days before she died. Amused by the rumors, Sabah said, "Even in my death, I'm making people busy."Sabah died on 26 November 2014, around 3:00 a.m., sixteen days after her 87th birthday, in her home at Hotel Brazilia from unspecified reasons. Clauda Akl, the daughter of her famous sister, actress Lamia Feghaly, published the sad news on her webpage at around 6:45 a.m. She mentioned that Sabah wished before dying that people would dance the Dabkeh at her funeral. They should not feel sad because she went to a better place, and should keep listening to her songs and always be happy no matter what, in the same way that Sabah always gave happiness to people. Sabah said: “I've lived enough”. After her death, her hairdresser Joseph Gharib said in an interview that during her last days, Sabah loved to wear red lipstick. She considered Joseph Gharib her son, and he considered her his mother.

On Sunday, 30 November 2014, four days after Sabah's death, thousands of people filled the streets to pay their respects. Her family, Lebanese officials, as well as many Arab delegates packed into St. George Cathedral in downtown Beirut to bid farewell to the famed singer, actress, and entertainer. The daylong proceedings took on a festive air as the crowds celebrated Sabah's taboo-breaking six-decade-long career. In front of the cathedral, the official Lebanese Army band played the national anthem followed by many songs from Sabah's repertoire, a first in the country's history. Fans clapped and sang their favorite Sabah songs. A troupe of dancers in traditional dress performed to the diva's music playing from loudspeakers. "I will call it a celebration and not a funeral," said Lebanese actress Ward El-Khal. "We feel today that we came here to share her feelings and to remember her. We will miss her."
For the funeral mass, Sabah's flag-draped coffin stood near the altar with a giant picture of the singer as a younger woman with her signature ultra-voluminous peroxide-blond hair. After the service, mourners carried the casket aloft to a hearse waiting outside while people clapped, threw flowers and reached out to touch it and take photographs. Sabah's body was carried through many towns to the church of her hometown of Bdadoun, where she was buried.


== Televised biography ==
Al Shahrourah, a TV drama based on her life, aired during Ramadan 2011. She was portrayed by actress/singer Carole Samaha. Sabah's reaction was positive towards the series and was happy that it was a success; though, she commented about certain inaccuracies, such as the depiction of her father as wearing traditional Lebanese garb.


== Awards and legacy ==
Sabah received many awards and honors during her lengthy career. Recent examples include:

She received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Dubai International Film Festival.
She was honored by the Egyptian cinema in Cairo.
She was honored in Beirut with a statue.
She was honored by the Lebanese Republic many times, e.g. by receiving the National Order of the Cedar medal.
A museum is being built in her village Bdadoun, which will contain her private letters, dresses, wardrobe accessories, rare old photographs of her and other memorabilia.
Her music is being taught in music classes in Lebanon.
She was honored by the Lebanese cinema and stage as well as Lebanese composers.
Months before she died, the Lebanese journalist Rima Njeim hosted a TV episode honoring her, which aired live on MTV Lebanon.
On 10 November 2017, Google celebrated her 90th birthday with a Google Doodle.In 2015, graffiti artists Halwani and the brothers Omar and Mohammad Kabbani commemorated Sabah in monumental murals on the sides of buildings in Beirut, paying tribute to the way she defied gender-based and other social taboos, challenging Lebanon's culture of sectarianism, and providing an alternative to images of political leaders and their sloganeering.


== Selected filmography ==
Source:1986 Ayyam El Lulu ايام اللولو aka = Days Of  The Lulu
1972 Paris wal Hob باريس والحب aka= Paris and Love
1970 Kanet Ayyam كانت ايام aka =It Were Days
1970 Nar El Shoq نار الشوق aka = Fire Of Longing
1969 Easabet El Nesa عصابة النساء aka =  Gang Of Women
1968 Thalath Nesaa ثلاث نساء aka = Three Women
1966 Mawwal El Aqdam El Zahabiyyah موال الاقدام الذهبية aka =Popular Song Of Golden Feet
1963 El Aydi el naema  الايدى الناعمة aka = The Soft Hands
1963 El Motamaradah المطاردة aka = The Chase
1961 El Hob Keda الحب كده aka = That's What Love Is
1961 Goz merti جوز مراتى  aka = Husband Of My Wife
1960 El Ragol El Thani الرجل الثانى aka = The Second Man
1959 El Ataba El Khadra العتبه الخضرا aka=The Green Threshold
1958 Shari' El Hobb  شارع الحب aka = Love Sreet
1958 Sallem Al Habayib سلم ع الحبايب aka = Say Hello To Lovers
1956 Izayy Ansak ازاى انساك aka= How To Forget You
1956 Wahabtak Hayati وهبتك حياتى aka = I Gave You My Life
1954 Khataf merati خطف مراتى aka = He Kidnapped My Wife
1953 Lahn Hobbi  لحن حبى  aka = Melody Of My Heart
1953 Zalamuni El Habayib ظلمونى الحبايب aka = Were Unjust To Me, The Lovers
1951  Khada'ni Abi  خدعنى ابى  aka = My Father Deceived Me
1950 Ana Satuta انا ستوته aka = I'm Sattutah
1948 Sabah El kher صباح الخير aka  = Good Morning
1947 Albi W Sefi قلبى و سيفى aka  = My Heart And My Sword
1947 lebnani Fi El gam'ah لبنانى فى الجامعة aka = Lebanese In University


== Selected discography ==
Source:


== References ==


== External links ==
[2]
Singer Sabah scores 9th husband to the 'married-to-Sabah-club'