Tanner Patrick Howe (born May 24, 1991 in Los Angeles) is an American singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist from Dallas, Texas. In August 2011, Patrick began uploading videos to his YouTube channel and in 2012, he was selected by Nigel Lythgoe Productions to star in E!'s "Opening Act." On April 22, 2014, he released the music video for his single,  "Satellites" and his debut album, "The Waiting Home". He describes the album as "intentionally diverse with a rock/pop influence". In the summer of 2014, he began uploading his music to Vine, where he now has over 700,000 followers and 150,000,000 loops. Patrick plays acoustic guitar, bass guitar, piano, and other instruments.


== Early life ==
Tanner Patrick was born in Los Angeles and then moved with his family to Dallas, Texas when he was 4 years old. One year after moving to Texas, Tanner's parents encouraged him to take piano lessons. When Tanner was 10 years old, he received his first guitar as a Christmas gift and began to write and record music using a cassette recorder known as a Talkboy.
At the age of 17, Patrick was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes. The following month after diagnosis, Patrick created the band Disco Curtis with longtime friends, Garrett Perales and AJ Novak. During the summer of 2009, Patrick's lung spontaneously collapsed twice (first in July and again in September), sending him to the hospital and forcing him to undergo a medical procedure known as Pleurodesis. Just a few days after being released from the hospital, the band was back to recording and playing shows. After one year of touring independently and generating buzz on social networking sites, the band signed to MySpace/Interscope Records, joined the 2010 Vans Warped Tour, performed at Bamboozle West in California (2010) and played touring shows with Boys Like Girls and Forever The Sickest Kids.Upon the conclusion of the Warped Tour, Tanner announced on September 10, 2010 that the other members of Disco Curtis were leaving the band to attend college. In late September 2010, Tanner moved to Los Angeles for the remainder of the year to write, refocus, and demo new songs as a solo artist.


== Music career ==
After several months of working with various producers around the Los Angeles area, Patrick moved back to Dallas to continue writing and producing demos on his own. In Spring of 2011, Tanner tweeted that he had written and demoed 80+ songs during the previous six months and was eager to share the new style and direction with his fans.
On July 23, 2011, Tanner announced the official beginning of "Tanner Patrick" via live web chat. That following month, he uploaded an introduction video to launch his YouTube channel. In September 2011, he posted his first cover video to YouTube. Less than 3 months after uploading his first video, his YouTube channel had received over 3,000,000 total views. On December 8, Patrick released the teaser video for his debut single, "Merry Go Round". Soon thereafter, he performed his debut show at Centennial Hall in Fair Park on December 10, 2011, with All Time Low and The Maine as part of the Unsilent Night Music Festival. On April 10, 2012, Patrick released the video for his debut single, "Merry Go Round", which received over 1.6 Million views.In mid-2012, he was selected by Nigel Lythgoe as one of eight artists to be featured on E!'s "Opening Act", where he shared the stage with country superstars, Brad Paisley and The Band Perry. His appearance on the show included a session with Nick Jonas and recording an original song (written by Keith Urban and Darrell Brown) at the Capitol Records Recording Studio. After his television debut, he was hired to write, produce, and record the original song, "Progress" and play the lead role in Logitech's new advertisement campaign. He successfully completed the project to rave reviews in the first quarter of 2013. A few months later, Patrick made his international debut, performing as a featured artist on the "YouTube Sensations: Under The Stars Concert" at The Coliseum in Singapore.Patrick recently completed writing and recording his debut album, "The Waiting Home", produced by Carlos de la Garza (Paramore, M83, Young The Giant), Ian Kirkpatrick (Blake Shelton, Breathe Carolina, Plain White T's), Mark Maxwell (producer) (3OH!3, Boys Like Girls) and Grant Harris aka Goldhouse. On the day of its release, the album charted in the iTunes Top 200 albums in multiple countries.
As a songwriter, Tanner has co-writes with several accomplished songwriters including, Jimmy Harry, Tim Myers, Damon Sharpe, Cisco Adler, Ian Kirkpatrick, Matt Squire, and RedOne Productions.


== Music style and influence ==
Tanner's music has been influenced by Chris Carrabba (Dashboard Confessional, Twin Forks), Max Bemis (Say Anything), Kenny Vasoli (The Starting Line, Person L, Vacationer), Adam Young (Owl City), Mark Hoppus and his favorite film, Fight Club.


== Discography ==


=== LPs ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Tanner Patrick on Facebook
Tanner Patrick on Twitter
Tanner Patrick on YouTube
Tanner Patrick on Tumblr