Taj Stansberry (born in Oakland, California, United States) is an American director and photographer, known for his music videos with artists such as Rihanna, J Lo, Usher, Ne-Yo, John Legend, Young Jeezy, Ludacris, Keyshia Cole, Swizz Beatz, Eve, Wale and Big Sean.His video for J Lo's "On the Floor" is the most watched female video of all time on YouTube with over 800,000,000 views. He is currently developing a few feature projects as well.His unique style and ability to capture an artists' personality has made him one of the most sought after directors in the business.


== Biography ==
Taj is a self-taught photographer turned director.  He started out photographing local rappers and models in Oakland, where he grew up.  He then went on to work as a production assistant for renowned music video director, Anthony Mandler, who motivated Taj to start directing himself. Soon after he signed to his first production company, Boxfresh Pictures. Today he is with Happy Place Productions under the umbrella of his TPK (The Popular Kid) brand.  Taj is represented by LARK CREATIVE for music videos and Verve Talent and Literary Agency for feature films.


== Videography ==
Rihanna - Don't Stop the Music
Jennifer Lopez - On the Floor ft. Pitbull
Swizz Beatz - Coolin ft Eve
Usher -  Lil Freak ft. Nicki Minaj
Jill Scott - So in Love ft. Anthony Hamilton
Keyshia Cole - Take Me Away
Kendrick Lamar - Money Trees
Big Sean - My Last ft. Chris Brown
Young Jeezy - Lose My Mind ft. Plies
Ne-Yo - Part of the List
John Legend ft. Ludacris - Tonight (Best You Ever Had)
Musiq Soulchild - Beautiful
Musiq Soulchild - Anything ft. Swizz Beatz
Shontelle - Impossible
Ludacris - My Chick Bad ft Nicki Minaj
Ludacris - My Chick Bad Remix ft Diamond, Trina and Eve
Shyne - The Original
Ray J - Last Wish
Eve - She Bad Bad
Fabolous - So NY
Fabolous - Ready
Jennifer Lopez - Actin' Like That ft. Iggy Azalea
G-Eazy - Me, Myself & I ft. Bebe Rexha


== References ==


== External links ==
YouTube. "Charts". Retrieved 5 February 2013.
"Director taj stansberry: noisemakers". NOISEMAKERS. 2010. Retrieved 4 February 2013.
Marshall, Robert (July 1, 2013). "Essentials: Taj Stansberry". HYPEBEAST. Retrieved 4 February 2013.
Stern, Doug (January 10, 2013). "Watch It: Eve "She Bad Bad" (TAJ,dir)". Video Static. Retrieved 4 February 2013.
"Rep Sheet". Hollywood Reporter. 418 (10): 13. March 2012.