Vivek J. Tiwary (born May 15, 1973) is an American author and theater producer.


== Early life ==
Tiwary was born in New York City to immigrant parents from India. He graduated from New York's Collegiate School high school and, in 1996, from the University of Pennsylvania, magna cum laude, with undergraduate degrees from both the Wharton School of Business and the College of Arts and Sciences.


== Career ==
In 2004, Tiwary was a lead producer for a Broadway revival of Lorraine Hansberry's A Raisin in the Sun.
In 2010, Tiwary was a co-producer for both the Broadway productions of Green Day's rock opera, American Idiot and The Addams Family. In total, Tiwary’s Broadway productions have garnered a total of 25 Tony Awards stemming from 44 Tony nominations.Tiwary is producing a stage musical of Jagged Little Pill, inspired by Alanis Morissette’s groundbreaking album of the same name, with a new story by Academy Award-winner Diablo Cody, and directed by Tony Award-winner Diane Paulus. The musical played a record-breaking, sold-out world premiere at American Repertory Theater in Boston from May 5 – July 15, 2018. It opened on Broadway on December 5, 2019.
Tiwary's graphic novel The Fifth Beatle was released in November 2013 and spent several weeks on The New York Times best-seller list, reaching #1 in its third week of release. In June 2014, The Fifth Beatle was nominated for a True Believers Comics Award for "Favourite 2013 Original Graphic Novel". The Fifth Beatle was announced as an INDIEFAB 2013 GOLD Winner for Graphic Novels & Comics. On July 25, 2014, The Fifth Beatle received the Eisner Award for Best Reality-Based work. On September 6, 2014 at Baltimore Comic-Con, The Fifth Beatle won two Harvey Awards for "Best Graphic Album - Original" and "Best Biographical, Historical, or Journalistic Presentation".  A paperback edition was released in October 2016.Tiwary is attached to write and produce a television mini-series based on The Fifth Beatle. Sonar Entertainment has optioned the rights to The Fifth Beatle for development as a multi-part television event series. Tiwary will pen the series adaptation and serve as executive producer. The project has also acquired rights to Beatles songs from Sony.
On September 26, 2015, Tiwary hosted the Harvey Awards.


== Personal life ==
Vivek is married to a pioneer scientist in neuropsychology researching the intersection between attention, anxiety, and technology. Vivek has two children ; his son also attend Collegiate, and they live in New York City.


== References ==