ill Weaver, also known by the stage name Invincible, is a rapper born in Champaign, Illinois. They use the they/them pronoun, identify as gender-nonconforming, and are Jewish. They are an anti-Zionist Jew, and have frequently been involved in activism in support of and solidarity with Palestinian refugees and the Palestinian people.At the age of 1, Invincible moved to Israel, returning to the United States at the age of 7. Upon their return to the USA, they first lived in Ann Arbor, Michigan, then moved to Detroit, Michigan. Invincible has been a member of the Anomalies crew since 1997. They have collaborated with Finale, Suheir Hammad, Marco Polo, Tunde Olaniran, and Waajeed of the Platinum Pied Pipers.


== Life and career ==
Invincible's mother is Israeli, and their father is from St. Louis. Their first language was Hebrew; they learned English from hip-hop music as a child and stopped speaking Hebrew by age ten.At 15, Invincible started performing at open mic nights and getting into Detroit's battle scene in its late-1990s heyday. Invincible's passion for activism was sparked when members of the Ku Klux Klan gathered and spoke at Ann Arbor's City Hall, which was down the street from their high school. Invincible was disgusted with what they heard, but felt they couldn't do anything about it.In 2008, Invincible released their debut album, ShapeShifters, on Emergence, a record label they co-founded.
In 2010, Invincible performed at the Can A Sista Rock a Mic? festival in Washington, D.C. That same year, Invincible received attention after the music video for "Ropes" was banned on mtvU, MTV's college-targeted channel, after it was deemed "too problematic" because of its theme of suicide. The ban was later lifted.Invincible's music reflects a deeply held belief in social justice expressed through narrative. Invincible 's time is split between youth organizing with Detroit Summer's Live Arts Media Project, the US-Palestine Youth Solidarity Network, and touring.


== References ==