Normani Kordei Hamilton ( nor-MAH-nee; born May 31, 1996) is an American singer and dancer.  She auditioned as a solo act for the American television series The X Factor in 2012, after which she became a member of the girl group Fifth Harmony. While in Fifth Harmony, Normani competed in Dancing with the Stars (2017) and released her first song outside of the group "Love Lies" (2018), a duet with Khalid, which peaked in the top ten in the US and was certified 5x platinum by RIAA.
Following Fifth Harmony's indefinite hiatus, Normani released a two-song EP with Calvin Harris, Normani x Calvin Harris (2018). That same year, she released the single "Waves" featuring 6lack, which won Normani the MTV Video Music Award for Best R&B Video. Her duet with Sam Smith, "Dancing with a Stranger" (2019), reached the top ten in the UK and US. In August 2019, Normani released her first solo single, "Motivation". The following year, Normani released "Diamonds" with Megan Thee Stallion for Birds of Prey: The Album. In July 2021, Normani released the lead single from her upcoming untitled debut solo album, "Wild Side", featuring Cardi B, which reached the top 20 in the US.


== Early life ==
Normani Kordei Hamilton was born on May 31, 1996, in Atlanta, Georgia to Derrick and Andrea Hamilton. She has two older half sisters, Ashlee and Arielle. Raised in New Orleans, she and her family relocated to Pearland, Texas, after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Normani attended private school as a child, and was homeschooled since sixth grade. From the age of three she competed in dance, gymnastics, and beauty pageants. She and her mother traveled between Houston and Los Angeles for acting, singing and dance auditions. She recorded a couple of songs, her first at age 13, and appeared in the HBO series Treme. Normani has said that dancing was her "first passion".


== Career ==


=== 2012–2018: The X Factor and Fifth Harmony ===

Normani auditioned for the second season of The X Factor USA in 2012 with "Chain of Fools" by Aretha Franklin. She advanced to the next round after getting approval from all four of the judges. It was during the second round of boot camp that led to her elimination. That marked the end of Normani's X Factor participation as a solo artist. However, she was brought back to the show and put into a group with four other girls, Ally Brooke, Lauren Jauregui, Dinah Jane, and Camila Cabello, who would later become Fifth Harmony. At the end of the show's season, the group managed to make it to the finale and finished in third place.In October 2013, Fifth Harmony released their first EP, Better Together. The group released their debut album, Reflection, in 2015, and their second album, 7/27, in 2016. The latter two albums spawned the hit singles "Worth It" and "Work from Home", respectively. After Cabello's departure from the group in December 2016, Fifth Harmony released their self-titled album as a quartet in August 2017. Normani became the quartet's de facto leader, leading solos and choreography. Her onstage confidence in the group caught the attention of executive Tunji Balogun, who founded RCA's imprint Keep Cool, and manager Brandon Silverstein, who began working with Normani in late 2017. On March 19, 2018, the group announced their decision to take an indefinite hiatus to pursue solo careers.


=== 2015–present: Solo projects and upcoming debut album ===

In 2015, Normani released two dance videos performing Future's "Fuck Up Some Commas" and Teyana Taylor's "Do Not Disturb" on her YouTube channel. From February 2016 through January 2017, Normani released covers of several songs, including Tory Lanez's "Say It" and mashups of Drake's "Fake Love"/"Sneakin'", and Solange's "Cranes in the Sky"/"Don't Touch My Hair", with the help of the producers The Invaders. Normani competed on season 24 of Dancing with the Stars from March through May 2017, alongside her dancing partner, professional ballroom dancer Valentin Chmerkovskiy. They reached the finals and finished in third place. In early August 2017, Normani had a cameo in singer Khalid's music video for "Young Dumb & Broke". In October 2017, it was announced that Normani had signed to management company S10 Entertainment as a solo artist. She was reported to have signed a publishing deal to Stellar Songs in early February 2018.Normani's duet with Khalid, "Love Lies" from the soundtrack for romantic teen comedy-drama film Love, Simon (2018), was released in February 2018. The song was considered a sleeper hit, peaking at number nine after charting for 28 weeks. "Love Lies" scored the highest first-week position for a single by a girl group member in the US, debuting at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100. "Love Lies" charted the Mainstream Top 40 charts for forty five weeks, tying the record for longest charting song on the chart with Dua Lipa's "New Rules".In April 2018, following Fifth Harmony's indefinite hiatus, it was announced that Normani had signed to Keep Cool/RCA Records for her debut solo album. The following month, it was reported that Normani signed to a modeling contract with Wilhelmina. Over the next few months, Billboard announced that Normani was collaborating with Calvin Harris and Kehlani. In August 2018, Normani was featured alongside Kehlani on Jessie Reyez's remix for her song "Body Count", which was featured on Reyez's EP, Being Human in Public. She also featured alongside Davido on Quavo's song "Swing", from his debut solo album Quavo Huncho (2018). That month, Normani signed on to a Puma campaign to endorse the brand's RS-0 shoes.On October 22, 2018, Normani and Calvin Harris released their EP, Normani x Calvin Harris, which features the songs "Checklist" with Wizkid and "Slow Down". The following day, she performed the two songs alongside a new song, "Waves" featuring 6lack, at the Tidal X Brooklyn concert. She then released "Waves" and premiered it on the music radio station Beats 1 on November 15, 2018. Normani was named the Top Female Breakout Artist of 2018 by Spotify. In her interview with Beats 1, Normani said that her debut album would be released in the first quarter of 2019, and its title is a number.On January 11, 2019, Normani and Sam Smith released the song "Dancing with a Stranger", peaking at number three in the UK and number seven in the U.S. One year into her solo career, Normani became the fastest solo artist (without an album) to surpass one billion combined streams on Spotify. In March 2019, she was the supporting act for Ariana Grande's first leg of the Sweetener World Tour in North America. Normani's single "Motivation", co-written by Grande, was released in August 2019, her first single without a featured artist. The song peaked at number 33 in the US. "Motivation" was nominated for a Soul Train Music Award for Best Dance Performance. In September 2019, Normani performed a dance sequence on the Savage X Fenty runway show for Rihanna's lingerie brand, Savage X Fenty, which premiered on Amazon Prime Video. Normani then announced that her debut album would be released in 2020, stating "it is a little more than halfway" complete. In October 2019, The Guardian ranked her as one of the 25 greatest female pop-group performers of all time. The following month, Normani was announced as the first brand ambassador of Savage X Fenty.Normani collaborated with Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj on the song "Bad to You", for the soundtrack of the 2019 film Charlie's Angels, released in November 2019. In January 2020, Normani and rapper Megan Thee Stallion released "Diamonds", the lead single for the soundtrack of the superhero film Birds of Prey (2020). Normani was named in the Forbes 30 Under 30 list for 2020. In February 2020, she was listed on BET's "Future 40" list, which is a list of "40 of the most inspiring and innovative vanguards who are redefining what it means to be unapologetically young, gifted & black". In June 2020, Normani joined Urban Decay as a global citizen and a campaign spokesperson for the makeup brand. In August 2020, Normani made a cameo in Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's music video for "WAP", alongside Kylie Jenner and Rosalía.On July 15, 2021, Normani released "Wild Side", featuring Cardi B. The song is expected to be the lead single from her upcoming debut studio album. The song peaked at #14 in the Billboard Hot 100. In August 2021, Normani made a cameo in Baby Keem and Kendrick Lamar's music video for "Family Ties". Normani also performed "Wild Side" as a musical guest act on Rihanna's Savage X Fenty Show Vol. 3, which premiered on Amazon's Prime Video service on September 24, 2021. Normani was awarded Best Dance Performance for "Wild Side" at the 2021 BET Soul Train Music Awards on November 28, 2021, this being her first win for the single. She did an interview with Entertainment Tonight following her win where she was asked if she had a message for her fans. She responded with "Summer's gonna be lit" referencing when her album will be released. The singer was also awarded Collaborator of the Year at the Variety Hitmakers Brunch on December 4, 2021, honoring the meticulously picked collaborations released by the artist, while simultaneously updating the fans on the reasoning behind her album delay in an interview conducted by Variety.


== Influences ==
Normani has cited 1990s and 2000s R&B and pop, Aaliyah, TLC, En Vogue, Toni Braxton, Selena, Jhené Aiko, Destiny's Child, Mariah Carey, Janet Jackson, Beyoncé, Ciara, Lauryn Hill, and Britney Spears as influences.


== Philanthropy ==
Along with Fifth Harmony, Normani was involved with the charities Girl Scouts of the US and the Ryan Seacrest Foundation. In September 2016, Normani was named the Diversity Ambassador for The Cybersmile Foundation, a non-profit organization providing support for victims of cyber bullying and online hate campaigns, after being racially abused online. In January 2017, Normani signed on to be the celebrity ambassador for the annual Stars & Strikes Celebrity Bowling Event & Tournament hosted by the Los Angeles charity A Place Called Home. In February 2017, it was announced that Normani partnered with American Cancer Society as a global ambassador to help increase awareness about the importance of breast cancer screening and HPV vaccination.


== Personal life ==
Normani is a Christian. She resides in Los Angeles, California in the San Fernando Valley.


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==

As a solo artist, Normani has won 15 awards, including four BMI awards, a Soul Train Music Awards, a MTV Video Music Award for Best R&B Video, and a Teen Choice Award. Overall, she has been nominated for 42 awards, including nominations for the Brit Award for Song Of The Year, and the People's Choice Award for Song of the Year.


== Tours ==


=== Supporting act ===
Ariana Grande - Sweetener World Tour (2019)


== References ==


== External links ==
Normani at IMDb
Rogers, Dweyne (February 24, 2018). "Normani Kordei: Singer dishes on fame, Fifth Harmony and her 'DWTS' future". Rolling Out.