Jacob Charles Osher, (born June 6, 1982), more popularly known as Jayceeoh, is an American DJ, record producer and turntablist. He is the founder of label imprint, "Super 7 Records".


== Biography (2013 - present) ==
In 2014, Jayceeoh gathered musical support from the likes of A-Trak, Diplo, Bassnectar, Borgore, The Bloody Beetroots, MAKJ, and TJR, to name just a few, which ultimately propelled him into becoming one of the fastest rising producer talents in the United States today. His bass heavy productions had also captured the attention of the music industry as a whole and some of the largest online music platforms. His debut original release titled "DAMN," a collaboration with fellow turntablist, DJ Scene, released on "Fools Gold Records" in November 2013. Earlier that year, Jayceeoh was crowned champion of VH1′s "Master of the Mix" TV show, in which he won a Quarter of a Million dollars and a 1 Year contract as the official DJ to Smirnoff Vodka. Wasting no time following the success of the show, Jayceeoh shifted his focus entirely to producing music and building his name in the trap and bass scene. Since then, Jayceeoh has released music on Atlantic Records, Dim Mak Records, Buygore Records, Ultra Records, Fool's Gold Records, and his very own Super 7 Records, amongst others.Jayceeoh is a brand ambassador for SOL Republic Headphones and was the face and voice of the Smirnoff x Spotify campaign in 2014. To date, he has provided the sounds for some of the most well known brands in sports, entertainment, and fashion alike, including, but not limited to: X-Games, Myspace, OK! Magazine, Burton, Nike, Red Bull, McDonald's, Adidas, Oakley, Comedy Central, Warner Bros. Records, and Playboy. He has been spotlighted in multiple magazines, periodicals, and websites including, but not limited to: OK! Magazine, The Source, Complex Magazine, Vibe, MTV.com, Examiner, VH1.com, The New Yorker, New York Press, Village Voice, New York Post, Perezhilton.com, URB, Remix, Tablist and Boston Globe.In the club circuit and live performance realm, Jayceeoh has maintained premier residencies for years across the country in some of the most notable venues in North America. He's also been afforded the opportunity to play in over 32 countries worldwide and on some of the biggest festival stages, including iHeartRadio Festival in Las Vegas, TomorrowWorld Festival in Atlanta, EDC in Mexico City, Firefly Festival in Dover, and Lights All Night festival in Dallas. Prior to 2013, Jayceeoh was the official tour DJ for Sammy Adams and Wiz Khalifa, and has performed alongside and worked with the likes of Bassnectar, Borgore, Terravita, The Bloody Beetroots, A-Trak, Redman, Morgan Page, Baauer, Sidney Samson, and others.In addition to his busy tour schedule and production, he is also the creator of one of the most renowned and successful DJ mixtape series of all time, "Super 7," which is a collaboration of some of the best DJ talent in the world. The Super 7 Series is critically acclaimed and has become an institution in the International DJ community. Some of the past guest DJs include Nghtmre, TJR, TWRK, Jazzy Jeff, Gaslamp Killer, Z-Trip, Party Favor, Tropkillaz, Lookas, Grandtheft, and more.


== Early years ==
Jayceeoh spent his high school years at the Taylor Allderdice High School in Pittsburgh, PA. Allderdice alumni include Wiz Khalifa, Mac Miller and the founders of their label, Rostrum Records. Throughout Wiz Khalifa's ascent to hip-hop's elite, Jayceeoh held down Wiz and the Taylor Gang with mixtape features as well as being his special occasion tour DJ. Jayceeoh then went on to spend his college years studying music and production at Emerson College in Boston.
In January 2011, Jayceeoh won 1st place at the National McDonald's Flavor Battle Finals. In December 2011, Jayceeoh was recruited by Sony/RCA recording artist Sammy Adams to be his official tour DJ for his major label debut. Soon after connecting with Sammy, they toured clubs and arenas alongside some of the biggest Pop stars in the world. They have also made national TV performances on Conan O'Brien and 90210.


== Discography ==


=== Singles and official remixes ===
Jayceeoh and Steve 1der - Till a Boy Get Kill (2013) (Independent Release)
Jayceeoh and DJ Scene - Ddamn (Original Mix) (2013) (Fools Gold Records)
Jayceeoh and Caked Up - King S#!t (2014) (Independent Release)
Jayceeoh and Made Monster - Go Harder 2.0 (2014) (Buygore Records)
Jayceeoh and Woogie - 2thawall (2014) (Buygore Records)
Alison Wonderland - Run (Jayceeoh Remix) (2015) (Warner Music Group Australia)
Morgan Page - Running Wild (Jayceeoh Remix) (2015) (Nettwerk Records)
Jayceeoh and Riot Ten - Hold It Down (2015) (Super 7 Records)
Jayceeoh, B-Sides and Fawks - Jit Going Ham" (2015) (Buygore Records)
Sbcr and Jayceeoh - Frankenstein (2015) (Dim Mak Records)
Jayceeoh - Turn Me Up Some (featuring Redman and Jay Psar) (2015) (Super 7 Records)
Jayceeoh and Woogie - Rap Don't Work (featuring OJ Da Juiceman) (2016) (Elysian Records)
Swanky Tunes - At The End Of The Night (Jayceeoh Remix) (2016) (Armada Music)
Martin Solveig - +1 (Jayceeoh Remix) (2016) (Big Beat Records)
The Knocks - I Wish (Jayceeoh Remix) (2016) (Atlantic Records)
Jayceeoh - Elevate (featuring Nevve) (2016) (Trap Nation)
Jayceeoh and Styles & Complete - Levitate (2019) (Circus Records)
Jayceeoh and Dialedin featuring Med - 187 (2019) (Circus Records)
Jayceeoh and The Bloody Beetroots - Grand Slam / Exodus (2019) (Slugz Music)
Jayceeoh and Throwdown - Hallelujah (2019) (Disciple Round Table)
Henry Fong featuring General Degree - What's the Move (Jayceeoh Remix) (2020) (Dim Mak Records)
Jayceeoh featuring LeRome Swiss - Powerful Dream (2021) (Deadbeats)
Jayceeoh - Bubble Up (2021) (Deadbeats)


=== Mixtapes and Guest Mixes ===
Jayceeoh - Super 7 Volume 1 (2010) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh - Super 7 Volume 2 (2010) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh Presents "Avant-Gucci" (2010) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh - Super 7 Volume 3 (2010) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh - Super 7 Volume 4 (2011) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh - Super 7 Volume 5 (2012) (Mixtape)
Earmilk.com Presents: Jayceeoh - Pop Models Volume 6 (2013) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh - BBC Radio 1 Ignition Mix (2015) (Guest Mix for Annie Nightingale)
Jayceeoh - Super 7 Volume 6 (2015) (Mixtape)
Jayceeoh - BBC Radio 1 Quest Mix (2016) (Guest Mix for Annie Nightingale)
Jayceeoh - Diplo & Friends Guest Mix (2017) (Guest Mix on BBC Radio 1)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website