Paul Amorese (born June 6, 1979) is an American drummer and percussionist from Rochester, New York. He has performed and toured with a variety of musical groups, including Bacci, the WMDs, The Commuters, Jack Dishel and Only Son, Visible from Space, Bryan Scary, Hypnotic Clambake, Boutros Boutros, and goodbyemotel. He also works as a session drummer and is currently based out of Brooklyn, NY.


== Biography ==
Amorese grew up in Rochester, New York, where he began drumming at a young age, performing with several marching bands. At the age of 14, he began playing at local Rochester bars with funk-rock band Boutros Boutros. He began touring extensively in 1999, with Hypnotic Clambake, a band from Boston, Massachusetts, known for its eclectic mix of musical genres. In 2002, he cofounded the folk/soul/hip hop group Bacci with guitarist, singer-songwriter Pete Bagale. 
Amorese has shared the stage with a wide variety of artists, including John Mayer, Fishbone, Wyclef Jean, John Entwistle (of The Who), Tommy Chong, Jefferson Starship, Jesse McCartney and Joss Stone.


== Active Projects ==
Amorese currently performs with Jack Dishel and Only Son, Bacci, Matt and Alyssa (Tinted Image), Bryan Scary, and the Melbourne rock band goodbyemotel. goodbyemotel is making a name for themselves with their "4D Live Music Experience," during which the band performs in front of a scrim onto which 3D images are projected. The band's music has been featured on the television show Gossip Girl as well as in a 2013 commercial for Chrysler Australia. Amorese was heavily involved in the songwriting process for goodbyemotel's album If, which is scheduled for a March 2014 release. If was produced by Kevin Killen, who has also worked with U2, Kate Bush, and Peter Gabriel.Based out of Brooklyn, NY, Amorese maintains a busy schedule as a live drummer, intermittently touring the United States, Europe, and Japan to perform. He also works regularly as a studio musician.


== Discography ==
Bacci: Hey Girl (2003)
Bacci: More (2005)
Visible from Space: Fly (2006)
The WMDs: The WMDs (2007)
The WMDs: We Are Waves (2009)
The Commuters: Rescue (2012)
Visible from Space: Dreams (2012)
goodbyemotel: If (2014)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Paul Amorese website
Paul Amorese on Twitter