Blanc Chun-Pong Wan  (Chinese: 尹俊邦) is a Hong Kong born classical pianist and an acclaimed writer.


== Biography ==
Blanc Wan has established a profile as a pianist, musicologist and educator. His recitals and radio appearances have included over a hundred performances across Europe, Asia, USA and throughout the United Kingdom. He is a governor of the Royal Northern College of Music. Blanc Wan holds fellowships from the Royal Society of Arts, Royal Schools of Music, London College of Music, and Trinity College of Music. He was elected as a Young Steinway Artist in 2011.After working with Bryce Morrison in London, Blanc Wan later studied the piano at the Royal Northern College of Music with the celebrated Russian pianist Dina Parakhina, and earned his master's degree at University of Oxford, where he worked with the distinguished musicologist Laurence Dreyfus. Whilst a student he won every major piano award including the F.J.P. Drake Memorial Award, the McLusky Challenge Award as well as the Celia Morris Prize. He was also awarded the First Prize in the British International Federation Music Competition and subsequently, was a prize winner at the Euterpe International Piano Competition in Italy.
Wan has broadcast extensively on radio networks such as RTHK and other overseas services, and has given many highly acclaimed recitals throughout Europe and Asia including the Czech Republic, Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom and a recital in Poland to mark the 200th anniversary of Frédéric Chopin's birth in 2010. He made his Germany recital debut in 2007 and was praised by the German newspaper Der Odenwalder Zeitung as having "A very high musical sensibility" and as "an artist who inspires his audiences in his music". His solo recital in the Czech Republic also received critical acclaim from the press, where his playing was described as "brilliant, his performance exudes both excitement and elegance." As the Editor-in-Chief of The Pianist magazine, he has published interviews with some of the world's greatest pianists including Lang Lang, Dame Fanny Waterman, Jörg Demus, Leslie Howard, Peter Donohoe, Marc-Andre Hamelin, Pascal Rogé, Pascal Devoyon, John Lill, Peter Frankl, Jean-Efflam Bavouzet and Stephen Hough, among others. He has been invited on the juries of many prestigious piano competitions in Asia. In 2014, Blanc Wan will serve on the juries of Asia Piano Open Competition, Hong Kong International Piano Open Competition – The Liszt Award, as well as Macau Open Competition for Young Pianists, etc.
As a musicologist, he has published numerous articles on piano performance. His current doctoral research at King's College London, focusses on the Russian Piano Pedagogy Tradition. He taught undergraduate classes in performance at the Goldsmiths, University of London, and has given masterclasses in Germany, Hong Kong and the United Kingdom.


== Publications ==
Selected articles

"What is Practice? Am I practicing?" The Pianist Magazine No. 1 (Hong Kong: 2012), 25-26.
"Performance Preparation" The Pianist Magazine No. 2 (Hong Kong: 2012), 14-17.
"Performing from Memory" The Pianist Magazine No. 3 (Hong Kong: 2012), 30-33.
"Does Piano Examination suit you or your pupil?" The Pianist Magazine No. 4 (Hong Kong: 2012), 22-23.
"Movement and Gestures" The Pianist Magazine No. 5 (Hong Kong: 2013), 22-23.
"Hand Position & Legato Playing" The Pianist Magazine No. 6 (Hong Kong: 2013), 20-23.
"Piano Fingering" The Pianist Magazine No. 7 (Hong Kong: 2013), 20-23.
"The Mind and The Body - Stage Presence of a Concert Pianist" The Pianist Magazine No. 8 (Hong Kong: 2013), 14-15.
"Performing with Black and White: The Conception of Right or Wrong" The Pianist Magazine No. 9 (Hong Kong: 2014), 24-25.
"Playing Octaves" The Pianist Magazine No. 10 (Hong Kong: 2014), 19-21.
"Music Training: Quantity and Quality" The Pianist Magazine No. 11 (Hong Kong: 2014), 8-9.
"Acton of the Wrist" The Pianist Magazine No. 12 (Hong Kong: 2014), 15-17.
"Training the weak fingers" The Pianist Magazine No. 13 (Hong Kong: 2015), 14-17.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website
University of Oxford
Steinway & Sons