Matrax is an American, Juno nominated songwriting and production duo from Philadelphia, consisting of Scott "Robot Scott" Carter and Damon "Haze" Hayes, who are best known as the producers for Keshia Chante', Eva Avila and Glenn Lewis. They produced the first and second singles for Keshia Chante', "Been Gone", "2U" and  "Ring The Alarm", which was used for WarChild's "Keep The Beat" charity campaign. All the proceeds from "Ring The Alarm" went to supported children at war and was also featured on triple platinum compilation "MuchDance 2006". The duo also wrote the first single for Eva Avila entitled "Give me the music" and worked on Glenn Lewis upcoming album Moment of Truth they produced the second single "Ugly Face".
Matrax initially gained acclaim in the Philadelphia area working with local hip-hop artists including Ms. Jade (Interscope), E Ness (Bad Boy), Roscoe P. Coldchain (StarTrak), and Freeway (Rocafella). Since that time they have worked with talent spanning the Pop, R&B, Alternative, Hip Hop spectrum, and have also had work featured on television. In 2010 they produced an updated remake of Brandy Norwood and Wanya Morris Duet "BrokenHearted"  Ft. Karina Pasian and SammieMatrax Productions recently helped develop Good Girl a female R&B group out of Philadelphia, with partners Dyshon Penn and Philly Phatboiz Productions they have collectively formed Walk The Sky LLC. Last year they signed with their partners Kopi Writes a new artist by the name of Kamil Sahar who is now working on her debut album with Chris Schwartz of the new RuffHouse Records. In the summer of 2012 Matrax helped in engineering, producing and developing a sound for newcomer Kat Dahlia alongside a host of talented writers ( Frankie Storm, Meleni Smith, Poison Ivory) and producers (Synamatik, Danny and J Dens) which caught the ear of by Vested In Culture VP of A&R Amanda Berkowitz.Berkowitz quickly brought Dahlia to the attention of veteran record executive Sylvia Rhone. In 2012, describing Dahlia as "more than just a pop artist," Rhone signed her to her newly launched label, Vested In Culture (VIC), a joint venture with Epic Records. Dahlia's debut album is set to come out in 2013, and will be VIC's inaugural release. Also in early 2012 Scottishh of Matrax scored a short film called Zero directed by Kim Towens for HBO.Since 2016 Scott Carter and William Carter with New Partner Ali Prawl have formed Triangle Park Music.


== Production discography ==
Kendrick Lamar (Interscope Records) "Star Life" ft Lyn Charles
R. Kelly (RCA) "Only one day on this Earth" and "Lights On" drum programming
Keshia Chanté (Sony Canada Urban/Epic) “Ring the Alarm” 3x CRAA Platinum on Much Dance 2006, "Been Gone","2U","Sorry"
Eva Avila (Canadian Idol /Sony BMG) (Featured on ABC's Dancing with the Stars)“Give me the Music”
Kat Dahlia (Vested in Culture/Epic Records)
Ashley Ring (Cash Money) "Party On" ft Trippz
Glenn Lewis ( Ruff House) "Ugly Face"
Latif "One Kiss"
Melanie Fiona (Universal)
Ginette Claudette (Universal Motown)
DRU (Universal Canada) The One
Raven Symone (Hollywood Records) “Face2Face”
Karina Pasian (Def Jam)
Sammie "BrokenHearted Remix"
Tiffany Evans (Columbia) “No Show”
Ryhmefest (J Records)
Red Café (Capital)
Petey Pablo(Jive) "Im A G"
Killer Mike (Aqumeni)
Ms. Jade (215 Entertaintment)


== References ==