Vivek Maddala is a four-time Emmy-winning composer who focuses on writing music for feature films, theater and dance productions, and television. He is known for composing music scores for independent movies such as Kaboom, Highway, and the Peabody-winning American Revolutionary: The Evolution of Grace Lee Boggs, as well as for silent film restorations for Turner Classic Movies, including a 90-minute score for the Greta Garbo film The Mysterious Lady (2002). Additionally, Maddala writes, produces, and performs as a multi-instrumentalist with various recording artists. He is a Sundance Lab Fellow  for film composition, and has had work premiere at the Cannes, Toronto, Berlin, and Sundance film festivals.  Maddala has received five Daytime Emmy nominations, with four wins, in the category of "Outstanding Music Direction and Composition."


== Personal life ==
Vivek Maddala is the son of economist G. S. Maddala. He began playing music at age 3 and later studied jazz performance at the Berklee College of Music. He earned degrees in electrical engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology and pursued graduate studies at the University of Washington.


== Awards ==
Grand Prize winner of the Young Film Composers Competition
ASCAP Film Scoring Fellowship
JPFolks Soundtrack Album of the Year for The Patsy
Gold Medals at the Park City Film Music Festival for Wild Oranges, They Turned Our Desert Into Fire and Grasshopper
BMI Conducting Fellowship
2010 Council of Outstanding Young Engineering Alumni
2014 Hollywood Music in Media Awards (nomination), Best Score – Documentary
2017 Daytime Emmy Awards (nomination), Outstanding Music Direction and Composition
2018 Daytime Emmy Awards (win), Outstanding Music Direction and Composition
2019 Annie Award (nomination), Outstanding Achievement for Music in an Animated Television/Broadcast Production
2019 Daytime Emmy Awards (win), Outstanding Music Direction and Composition
2020 Annie Award (nomination), Outstanding Achievement for Music in an Animated Television/Broadcast Production
2020 Daytime Emmy Awards (win), Outstanding Music Direction and Composition
2021 Daytime Emmy Awards (win), Outstanding Music Direction and Composition


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Vivek Maddala at IMDb