Bob Barry (born March 17, 1943) is an American actor and photographer based in Los Angeles, California. He is known for his "performance portraits" of jazz, R&B and blues musicians.


== Early life and acting career ==
Barry was born Robert Barry Horowitz in Suffern, New York. He grew up in Spring Valley, New York and worked as an actor in New York City. As Robert Barry, he appeared Off-Off Broadway in Alligator Man, Off-Broadway in The Brass Butterfly with Sam Waterston and made his Broadway debut in the 1976 musical So Long, 174th Street starring Robert Morse.
During this period Barry established side careers as a lounge entertainer and television commercial performer.  Among his commercial assignments was the role of a singing raisin for Post Raisin Bran.


== Photography career ==
While pursuing acting work in New York, Barry was a model for photographer Diane Arbus's 1968 Zeiss-Ikon Camera ad campaign. Upon moving to Los Angeles in 1980, he developed an interest in professional photography. His subsequent friendship with guitarist John Pisano led Barry to photograph over 160 noted jazz guitarists at Pisano's weekly "Guitar Night" event, including George Van Eps, Herb Ellis, Al Viola, Howard Alden, Joe Diorio, Anthony Wilson, Jimmy Wyble, Dori Caymmi and Phil Upchurch.
Barry's mentor, photographer Ray Avery, used the phrase "performance portrait" to describe Barry's approach of photographing musicians during performance using only available light.  Barry practiced his craft at jazz festivals, concerts and clubs in the Los Angeles area, such as Vitello's, Catalina's and the Jazz Bakery, which made him their official photo archivist in 2012.  His photographs have appeared in the artwork for music releases by Kenny Burrell, Rosemary Clooney, Diane Schuur, Pat Martino, Mary Stallings, Mary Murphy, Johnny Rivers and Danny Seraphine.
Barry serves on the committee of the Milt Hinton Award for Excellence in Jazz Photography.
Barry's photography was the subject of a 2012 documentary by filmmaker Dailey Pike. Titled Bob Barry: Jazzography in Black and White, the nonfiction film is an examination of Barry's life and careers. It was awarded at the Tupelo Film Festival.


== Public exhibitions ==
American Jazz Museum, Kansas City, MO.  “Jazz In Black & White” May–August 2008
Flazh! Alley Gallery, San Pedro, CA.  “The Brotherhood”  May–June 2008
Flazh! Alley Studio, San Pedro, CA. “Jazzography: The Color Performance Portraits of Bob Barry” November 29, 2010 – January 8, 2011
American Jazz Museum, Kansas City, MO. “Reflections of Jazz” July 2011 – October 2011
Brand Library of Music & Art, Barnsdall Municipal Art Gallery, Hollywood, CA.  “The Performance Portraits of Bob Barry” February 2011
University of Maryland, College Park, MD.  “Convergence – Jazz, Films, and the Visual Arts” February 14 – May 31, 2013
Orange Coast College, Costa Mesa, CA.  “Jazzed” April 3–25, 2013
American Jazz Museum, Kansas City, MO.  “Jazzography – The performance Portraits of Bob Barry” May 6 – July 21, 2013
Crown Plaza Hotel at LAX Jazz Club, Los Angeles, CA.  23 Images (permanent collection)
Vitello's Restaurant & Jazz Club, Studio City, CA.  40 Images (permanent collection)
Universal Studios, Henry Mancini Building, Universal City, CA.  19 Images (permanent collection)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
[1] A Night at the American Jazz Museum – Film by Dailey Pike