Indira Joshi (Nepali: इन्दिरा जोशी, born July 18, 1986 (Shrawan 03, 2043 B.S.)) is a Nepali female singer. Indira Joshi is a prominent female singer for Modern, Pop, Playback, as well as judge of an International Franchise reality show Nepal Idol. Indira Joshi has become famous after she released her debut album "Dance With Me" from which her first popular number "Rato Ghanghara" established her as a singer.


== Childhood ==
Indira Joshi was born on July 18, 1986 (Shrawan 03, 2043 B.S.) and is the fifth of seven siblings. Her parents are Mr. Janhawi Prasad Joshi and Mrs. Alaknanda Joshi at Nawalparasi District, Parasi Bazar, Lumbini Zone, Nepal. Indira's childhood was full of passion for music, since childhood she used to participate in local singing and dancing competition. She used to be the first choice, when it came to perform at her school and other local events. She studied at Little Plant English Boarding School till 5, and went to Sayapatri Higher Secondary English School until she completed her SLC. She joined Peoples Campus for her PCL and Shankher Dev campus for BBS and later joined Golden Gate International for her master's degree. She played in a children's playground (Bal Mandir) just 2 minutes away from her home during her childhood.


== Musical career ==
While she was in fifth grade, she came to Kathmandu to participate on a television singing competition Ko Bhanda Ko Kam in Nepal Television which was a very popular television show for kids during her time, after winning the first position she was eager to learn vocal classes, as she was too young, her parents were not ready to leave her under her relatives' supervision. later, she returned after completing her SLC. At the age of 17 she again participated on another television singing competition Nepali Tara which was a popular talent hunt television show at that time, where she got female No 1 position. The show Nepali Tara introduced her to the public. Later in 2011 she released her debut album "Dance With Me" but it was difficult to create an album before this. She spent a good amount of money to produce her songs but the musicians involved never completed the project for her. In her third attempt, she finally succeeded and released her solo album "Dance With Me" on March 25, 2011. She learned vocal classes from Do Re Mi Music School in Kathmandu which is affiliated by Indira Maha Sangeet Bidhyalaya Illahabadh.
She is a judge of on the International Franchise reality show Nepal Idol. She judged a television singing and dancing competition for kids, Clinic Healthy Hair Contest, organized by Image Channel. She also judged Miss Nepal 2016 and Man Hunt Nepal 2017.


== Discography ==
Indira Joshi released her debut album "Dance With Me" on 2011 where "Chaubandi Choli ani Rato Ghanghara" is a popular number. Later she started dropping her singles along with music videos. She is a successful playback singer. She performed many hit movie numbers, out of which her blockbuster hit number is "Udhereko Choli" from the movie Loot, other hits include "Motorcycle Ma" for the movie Prem Geet 2, "Chiya Coffee" form the movie Nai Nabhannu La 4, "Mari lanu ke chha ra" from the movie A Mero Hajur 2, title track "Thuli" from the movie "Thuli", and the title track "First Love" from the movie "First Love".
She has also worked with Hollywood singer Sean Kingston for a song called "Timi ra Ma" produced by Iraj weeraratne – (U & Me). She has also collaborated with Sri Lankan singer Iraj Weeraratne for the song "Behuli" which was popular in Nepal. Also their experimental song "Just one Click" was a hit. Their recent project is "Mero Baba", a song dedicated to fathers. They continue to collaborate. Till the date she has sang more than 300 songs.

Dance With Me – 2011
Hits of Indira Joshi – 2015
Timi ra Ma − 2017Apart from movies songs her featured numbers, collection albums, single tracks, patriotic songs and pop songs are famous.


== Awards and achievements ==
Winner of Ko Bhanda Ko Kaam
Female No 1 contestant of Nepali Tara
Glassic most enchanting voice in Nepali Tara
Female Best Vocal Performance (Pop) – Kantipur Honors – 2011
Kamana Critic Awards – (Contributing for Nepali Music) – 2018
Youth Peace Ambassador – (Universal Peace Federation)
Brand Ambassador – (Dabur Special Hair Oil) – 2018 – till the date
Goodwill Ambassador for Blood Donation – NRNA (Red Cross Society Nepal) – 2019
De Re Na music award for International collaboration


== Songs ==
Few songs of Indira Joshi

Chaubandhi Choli ani Rato Ghanghara
Behuli
Motorcycle Ma
Relimai
Udhereko Choli
Mari Lanu K Chha Ra
Magne Banayo
Rujhu Rujhu
Just One Click
Mero Baba
Timi ra Ma
Macchi Marana – Remix (Decide)
Chiya Coffee
Ek Palta
Thuli
Girlfriend
Traffic Jam
Tutyo Tara Aakash Ma
Jau ki najau feat Kutumba
Baji Prem Ko
Local beauty
Hasna sikayeu sathi
Kanchha le sodhyo malai
Raat ko kura
Mohani lagaune
Timi samjhana bhitra


== References ==


== External links ==
Tag: indira joshi
In conversation with Indira Joshi
Know some unknown facts about singer Indira Joshi
Singer Indira Joshi in Twakendra Niwas
Interview with Indira Joshi
Indira Joshi on Facebook
Indira Joshi on Twitter