Aishwarya Vidhya Raghunath is an accomplished Carnatic music vocalist. She is among the foremost and popular young performing classical musicians in India. Hailing from a family of music connoisseurs, Aishwarya was initiated into the world of music at the age of three. She is an "A" grade artiste of All India Radio and Doordarshan.


== Music career ==
Aishwarya's first full-fledged concert was at the age of thirteen. Since then, she has travelled widely in India and abroad and enthralled her listeners.
Aishwarya, today, has the honour of being the disciple of musical stalwarts - Sangita Kalaacharya Smt (Late) Seethalakshmi Venkatesan, Padma Bhushan Sri P. S. Narayanaswamy and Sangeetha Kalasagaram Smt Vegavahini Vijayaraghavan, thus being an upholder of the Semmangudi bhani and the Veena Dhanammal bhani.
Aishwarya’s style is an amalgamation of classicism and spontaneity, laced with a touch of elegance and is known for its purity, clarity and its appeal. Her resonant and mellifluous voice has always captivated the audience. Her concerts are marked by aesthetic grace and focussed approach.


== Awards ==
"Best Concert Prize (2015)", from The Music Academy, Chennai.
"DK Pattammal Award (2015)", from Karthik Fine Arts, Chennai.
"Best Concert Prize (2014)", from The Music Academy, Chennai.
"MS Subbulakshmi Award (2014)", from Narada Gana Sabha, Chennai.
"Best Performer, 2013", from Sri Parthasarathy Swamy Sabha, Chennai.
"Meena Srinivasan Award", from the Indo-Canadian Shastri Foundation.
"Best Vocalist" award by Ramana Kendra, Chennai.
"Sirkazhi Govindarajan Award" from Krishna Gana Sabha, Chennai.
"RMKV Award of Excellence", by Rasika Fine Arts, Chennai.
"Best Vocalist" from the Bangalore Gayana Samaja.
"Yagnaraman Endowment Prize" from Krishna Gana Sabha, Chennai.
"Rising Young Talent" by the Bangalore Rotarians.
Winner of the All India Radio competition.
Recipient of the scholarship by the Ministry of Culture (India).


== Education ==
Aishwarya holds a B.E. degree in biotechnology from P.E.S. Institute of Technology, Bangalore. She worked as an executive in the biotechnology industry. In an interview, she stated "I realized that while I did love biotechnology, music was really my calling, and that I would do injustice if I did not invest the right amount of time and energy in it. Music, like any other profession, is a full-time job and requires a lot of thought and mind space as a performing art".


== References ==

Other news reviews and articles


== External links ==
Interview at KnowYourStar.com Archived 21 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine