Amanda Louisa Gosein-Cameron (born 10 July 1974), known professionally as Amanda Ghost, is an English singer, songwriter, record producer, music executive, film producer and former president of Epic Records (2009–10). A six-time Grammy nominee, and three-time Ivor Novello winner, she has written and/or produced multi-platinum records for artists including Beyoncé, Shakira, John Legend and James Blunt.In 2015, Ghost partnered with producer Gregor Cameron to found Unigram, a production company based in London. She was appointed CEO of AI Film in 2019.


== Career ==
Born in North London to a Gibraltarian mother and an Indo-Trinidadian father, Ghost was encouraged at an early age to play guitar. In 1997, she contributed a version of Gary Numan's "Absolution" to the tribute album Random; unlike the other tracks on the album, it was a song Numan had not released, and came out months before his own version. Her first recording contract was with Warner Bros. Records in Los Angeles, California, for whom she recorded her first album, Ghost Stories. Ghost's second album was released in autumn 2006 on her own record label, Plan A Records, and was preceded by a limited edition EP, Blood on the Line.
Ghost co-wrote James Blunt's “You're Beautiful”, "Beautiful Liar" for Beyoncé and Shakira, and Jordin Sparks' first single "Tattoo". Amanda also co-wrote four songs for Beyoncé's third album, I Am… Sasha Fierce: "Disappear", "Satellites", "Ave Maria" and "Once in a Lifetime". She co-wrote and sang backing vocals on "Colours", which was on the Prodigy's 2009 album, Invaders Must Die. She also collaborated with John Legend on the lyrics for the track "Getting Nowhere" by Magnetic Man.
On 3 February 2009, Ghost was named the new president of Epic Records. She replaced Charlie Walk, who left at the end of 2008 to start his own company.
Ghost co-wrote, with Scott McFarnon and Ian Dench, "Red", a top-5 hit for Daniel Merriweather in the UK in May 2009, and "For the Glory" and "Vanity Kills" by Ian Brown, which she co-wrote with Ian and Dave McCracken. She also co-wrote and produced the Shakira multi-platinum-selling single "Gypsy", from the album She Wolf.
Amanda left her position as president of Epic Records in 2010. and became CEO of her own record label, Outsiders, a joint venture with The Universal Music Group. In 2011, she was executive producer for the Scissor Sisters album Magic Hour, and co-wrote the smash hit "Only The Horses", co-produced by Calvin Harris. She co-wrote two songs for the Florence and The Machine album Ceremonials, and has more recently collaborated with John Legend, Sub Focus, Jorja Smith and ASAP Rocky.
Ghost is a three-time Ivor Novello Award winner, a Golden Globe nominee, and has been nominated for six Grammy Awards. One of the latter was as co-producer of two tracks on Beyoncé's album, I Am... Sasha Fierce, which was nominated as Album of the Year, and the other for "Once in a Lifetime", which she co-wrote with Scott McFarnon, Ian Dench, Jody Street, James Dring and Beyoncé. The song was the title track from Beyoncé's film, Cadillac Records and was nominated for the Best Song Written for a Motion Picture Award.
In 2015, Ghost founded Unigram Media, a film, TV, theatre and music production company with her husband, film & TV Producer, Gregor Cameron.  Backed by Len Blavatnik's Access Industries, their first feature film was the late Nineties set, cult classic, Kill Your Friends starring Nicholas Hoult and James Corden. Current projects include Tetris: The Movie, starring Golden Globe Award-winner Taron Egerton (Rocketman, Kingsman franchise) and directed by Jon S. Baird (Stan & Ollie, Filth).
AI Film appointed Amanda Ghost as its CEO in 2019. AI Film's past projects include the Golden Globe, Oscar and BAFTA winning biopic I, Tonya starring Margot Robbie and Allison Janney, Bart Layton's crime drama American Animals as well as Mel Gibson's Academy Award winning Hacksaw Ridge, Martin Scorsese's historical drama, Silence, and Lee Daniels’ The Butler.
In music, Unigram are creating, producing and supervising original movie and theatre scores, including the Golden Globe Winning feature from Lee Daniels’, The United States Vs. Billie Holiday and the cast album for the 2020 fourteen Tony Award nominated smash hit Broadway musical Moulin Rouge!
Amanda currently serves on the board of Deezer, a global music DSP and Amuse, a digital music distribution service.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===
"Idol" (2000) - UK #63
"Glory Girl" (2000)
"Filthy Mind" (2000) - only released in the U.S./Australia
"Break My World" (2004) - UK #52 †
"Feed" (2004) †
"Girls Like You" - digital only release (2005)
"Monster" - digital only release (2005)
"Blood on the Line" EP (2006)
"Time Machine" (featuring Boy George) (January 2007)† Credited to Dark Globe featuring Amanda Ghost


=== Albums ===
Ghost Stories (2000)
Blood on the Line - The Download Collection (2008)


=== Songwriting credits ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Amanda Ghost's MySpace
Amanda Ghost discography at MusicBrainz