Tim Bowness (born 29 November 1963) is an English singer and songwriter primarily known for his work as part of the band No-Man, a long-term project formed in 1987 with Porcupine Tree's Steven Wilson.


== Music career ==
In addition to recording albums with No-Man (for record labels such as One Little Indian, Sony/Epic, and Kscope), Bowness has appeared on albums by US artists OSI and David Torn, Italian artists Alice, Saro Cosentino, Fjieri, Nosound and Stefano Panunzi, Norwegian groups White Willow and The Opium Cartel, and others.
In 1994, he recorded an album with Porcupine Tree/Japan/Rain Tree Crow keyboard player Richard Barbieri, called Flame.Bowness has been a core or occasional member of several other bands. He has sung for German band Centrozoon and British electro-improvisers Darkroom on the more vocal-orientated projects performed and released by each group. He is the lead singer and guitarist for Henry Fool and also sings for Memories of Machines. He was singer (and occasional second guitarist) for Samuel Smiles between 1992 and 2000. Bowness also has a longstanding duo collaboration with Peter Chilvers (with whom he has worked in Samuel Smiles and Henry Fool). This project has so far produced two albums, California, Norfolk (2002) and Modern Ruins (2020).
Bowness's debut solo album, My Hotel Year was released on One Little Indian in 2004. The album made use of Bowness collaborators both old and new, and featured Roger Eno and Hugh Hopper amongst others.
In 2009, Bowness co-wrote and co-produced Talking with Strangers, an album by former Fairport Convention singer, Judy Dyble.
Warm Winter, the debut album by Memories of Machines (a collaboration with Nosound's Giancarlo Erra), was issued on Mascot in April 2011, and the self-titled debut release by Anglo Estonian project Slow Electric was released on Panegyric in October 2011.
Bowness's second solo album Abandoned Dancehall Dreams was released on 23 June 2014 on Inside Out Music. Produced by Bowness and mixed by Steven Wilson, collaborators included Stephen James Bennett. Pat Mastelotto, Colin Edwin and Classical composer Andrew Keeling. Richard Barbieri and Grasscut provided mixes for the bonus disc. Abandoned Dancehall Dreams came out to some of the best reviews of Bowness' career. Receiving positive endorsements from Prog and Classic Rock, the album reached No. 18 in the official UK Rock charts and No. 1 in Prog magazine's July 2014 and August 2014 charts.
A follow-up to Abandoned Dancehall Dreams, Stupid Things That Mean the World, was released on 17 July 2015 on Inside Out Music. Bowness admitted similarities between the two albums, in both the musical approach and artwork, calling it the second part of a new chapter that began with Abandoned Dancehall Dreams. Produced by Bowness and mixed by Bruce Soord, collaborators included Stephen James Bennett, Peter Hammill, Colin Edwin, Phil Manzanera and David Rhodes. The album reached No. 10 in both the official UK Rock and UK Vinyl charts, and No. 1 in Prog magazine's July 2015 and August 2015 charts. In September 2015, Stupid Things That Mean the World was No. 9 in the first ever Official Charts Company Progressive Albums chart.
Tim Bowness's fourth solo album Lost in the Ghost Light - a concept album revolving around the onstage and backstage thoughts of a veteran musician - was released on 17 February 2017 on Inside Out Music. The album garnered very positive reviews from the Rock media - Prog, Powerplay, Classic Rock, Shindig! -  as well as in more mainstream publications such as The Daily Express, Mojo and Classic Pop. Produced Tim Bowness with Stephen James Bennett, the album mixed and mastered by Steven Wilson and alongside performances by regular collaborators such as Stephen James Bennett, Bruce Soord, Colin Edwin and Andrew Keeling, featured guest appearances from Jethro Tull's Ian Anderson, and ex Camel/Happy The Man keyboard player Kit Watkins. Lost in the Ghost Light reached No.5 in the official UK Rock chart, No.8 in the official UK Progressive chart and won "Album Cover of the Year" at the 2017 Progressive Music Awards.Flowers at the Scene was released on 1 March 2019 on Inside Out Music. Like its predecessor, the album garnered extremely positive reviews from the Rock media in Britain and Europe, as well as in more mainstream publications such as The Daily Express, Mojo and Classic Pop. Produced by Tim Bowness with Steven Wilson - as No-Man - and Brian Hulse, the album featured guest appearances from Peter Hammill, Kevin Godley, Andy Partridge, Jim Matheos, David Longdon, Colin Edwin, Dylan Howe and others. Flowers at the Scene reached No.5 in both the official UK Rock and UK Progressive charts, No.24 in the official UK Vinyl chart, and No.38 in the official UK Physical sales chart.
Late Night Laments, Bowness's sixth solo album, was released on 28 August 2020 on Inside Out Music. A more intimate and atmospheric work than any of his previous solo albums, guest players included Richard Barbieri, Kavus Torabi and Colin Edwin. The album was mixed by Steven Wilson, mastered by Calum Malcolm, and reached No.45 in the official UK Physical sales chart, No.4 in the UK Progressive charts, and No.56 in the official Scottish chart. The album was No.14 in Prog Magazine's Best Of 2020 critic's list.


== Business ==
In 2001, Bowness co-founded the online record label and store Burning Shed with Peter Chilvers and Pete Morgan. Originally a label dedicated to producing online, on-demand CDRs of experimental side-projects by the likes of Bass Communion, Hugh Hopper and Roger Eno) it quickly evolved into hosting official online stores for No-Man, Porcupine Tree, Jethro Tull, King Crimson, Andy Partridge and many other artists.


== Podcast ==
In May 2020, Bowness launched 'The Album Years', an audio only podcast with his partner in No-Man, Steven Wilson. It was very successful upon release, charting highly all around the world on Apple Podcasts.


== Charting songs and albums ==


== Select discography (Outside No-Man) ==


=== Solo albums ===
My Hotel Year (One Little Indian, 2004) – Debut solo album
Abandoned Dancehall Dreams (Inside Out Music, 2014) – 2nd solo album
Stupid Things That Mean the World (Inside Out Music, 2015) – 3rd solo album
Lost in the Ghost Light (Inside Out Music, 2017) – 4th solo album
Songs from the Ghost Light (Burning Shed, 2017) – Lost in the Ghost Light companion release featuring outtakes, remixes and live performances.
Flowers at the Scene (Inside Out Music, 2019) – 5th solo album
Late Night Laments (Inside Out Music, 2020) – 6th solo album


=== With Peter Chilvers ===
California, Norfolk (Burning Shed, 2002) – with Peter Chilvers
Slow Electric (Burning Shed, 2010) – as Slow Electric - with Peter Chilvers, UMA (Robert Jüjendal, Aleksei Saks) and Tony Levin
Modern Ruins (Burning Shed, 2020) – with Peter Chilvers


=== With Plenty ===
It Could be Home (2018) 
Enough (2021) 


=== Other albums ===
Flame (One Little Indian, 1994) – with Richard Barbieri
Ones And Zeros'' (Voiceprint, 1997) – with Saro Cosentino (guest vocals on one track)
Viaggio in Italia (NuN Entertainment, 2003) – with Alice (guest vocals on two tracks)
The Scent of Crash and Burn EP (Burning Shed, 2003) – with centrozoon
Never Trust the Way You Are (Resonancer, 2004) – with centrozoon
Duality (Holy Records, 2008) – with Rajna (guests on three tracks)
Lightdark (Kscope, 2008) – with Nosound (guest vocals on one track)
Blood (Inside Out, 2009) – with OSI (guest vocals on one track)
Talking with Strangers (FixIt, 2009) with Judy Dyble (guest vocals throughout the album, co-written & co-produced by Bowness)
"Fjieri: "Endless"", (Forward Music Italy, 2009) - with Stefano Panunzi, Nicola Lori, Mick Karn, Richard Barbieri, Gavin Harrison, Nicola Alesini, Andrea Chimenti
"A Rose (Stefano Panunzi album)" (Emerald Recordings, ER-CD 01/09, 2009) - with Mick Karn, Thomas Leer, Giancarlo Erra, Theo Travis, Robby Aceto, Fabio Fraschini, Markus Reuter, Andrea Chimenti
Warm Winter (Mascot, 2011) – with Giancarlo Erra (as Memories of Machines)
"Fjieri: "Words Are All We Have", (Emerald Recordings, ER-CD 02/15, 2015) - with Stefano Panunzi, Jakko Jakszyk, Gavin Harrison, Nicola Lori
Skyscraper Souls (Cherry Red, 2017) – with Geoff Downes & Chris Braide (guests on one track)


== References ==


== External links ==
Tim Bowness official website
No-Man official website
No-Man "A Confession"
Burning Shed