D. James Goodwin is an American record producer, recording engineer, musician, and filmmaker, based in New York. Goodwin is known for his experimental and irreverent approach to recording. His discography includes bands and artists such as Muzz, Bonny Light Horseman, Blitzen Trapper, Bob Weir, Kevin Morby, Benjamin Booker, Craig Finn, Tim Berne, David Torn, Whitney, Wand, Kaki King, The Bravery, Natasha Bedingfield, Devo, Matt White, Lapko, Mook (with actor, Paul Dano) Thursday, Murder by Death, Camphor, New London Fire, Donna Lewis, Pompeii, and Kiss Kiss. Goodwin works primarily out of his own customized recording and mixing facility, called The Isokon, in Woodstock, New York.
Goodwin is the primary member of his own groups Snowflake and Baltic. He is also the keyboardist and saxophonist in Ultraam, and drummer and guitarist in the band Camphor. Snowflake released its debut LP in 2013, entitled "We All Grow Toward the Sea". The record was written and recorded by Goodwin himself in all roles. In addition to production, Goodwin has written and recorded music for various television programs on MTV, Bravo, Discovery, and CBS, among others. His music has been featured on shows such as The Oprah Winfrey Show, The Ellen DeGeneres Show, America's Next Top Model, The Real World, CNN Headline News, and many others.
Goodwin was a panelist at the 2008 Potluck Audio Conference (formerly the Tape Op Conference) in New Orleans. He also been featured in Electronic Musician, a widely read, internationally recognized recording technology journal. In April 2009, Goodwin's articles about "left field" recording and mixing techniques were published in Electronic Musician.


== The Isokon ==
The Isokon is the name of Goodwin's private recording studio, located in Woodstock, New York. The facility was finished in Spring of 2010, and will be Goodwin's homebase for the foreseeable future. While the studio is private, it is occasionally available to rent out on a limited basis, when Goodwin is working elsewhere or away.
Known primarily for his quirky approach to recording, The Isokon follows that mindset. With a bevy of strange instruments and technical devices, the facility is installed in an mid century residential home, and set up in such a way that artists are made to feel as though they are away in vacation in the woods of upstate NY, surrounded by numerous instruments, toys, and manipulation devices, aimed at assisting Goodwin in making adventurous recordings, without worrying about the clock, or the time constraints of a typical studio.


== Limited discography ==
Bonny Light Horseman - self titled - 37d03d
Muzz - self titled - Matador Records
Heather Woods Broderick - Invitation - Western Vinyl
Craig Finn - I Need A New War - Partisan
Kevin Morby - Oh My God - Dead Oceans
Bob Weir – Blue Mountain – Sony Music
Craig Finn – We All Want the Same Things – Partisan Records
Whitney – Light Upon the Lake – Jagjaguwar
Kevin Morby – Singing Saw – Dead Oceans
Tim Berne – You've Been Watching Me – ECM Records
David Torn – Only Sky – ECM
Uni Ika Ai – Keeping a Golden Bullseye in the Corner of My Mind – Zen Squid
Craig Finn – Faith in the Future – Partisan
BOBBY – Bobby – Partisan
Kelli Scarr – Danglin' teeth – Silence Breaks
Rubik – Solar – Fullsteam Records
Matt White – It's the Good Crazy – Ryko
Natasha Bedingfield – Strip Me – Sony
Devo – Something for Everybody – Warner
Trouble Andrew – (in progress) – Virgin
The Bravery – Stir the Blood – Island/Def Jam
Lapko – A New Bohemia – Fullsteam
Camphor – Drawn to Dust – Friendly Fire Recordings
New London Fire – Happiness Through Radios and Wires – (self-released)
New London Fire – I Sing the Body Holographic – Eyeball Records
Donna Lewis – In the Pink – Peruzzi Music
Thursday – "Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn't've)" – Tony Hawk's American Wasteland (soundtrack) – Vagrant Records
Baumer – Were It Not For You – Eyeball Records
Kiss Kiss – Reality vs. the Optimist – Eyeball
Murder by Death – Who Will Survive, and What Will Be Left of Them? – Eyeball
Pompeii – Assembly – Eyeball
Stiffed – Burned Again – Outlook Music
Electric Century – Electric Century – Panic State Records


== References ==

https://tapeop.com/interviews/138/d-james-goodwin/


== External links ==
D. James Goodwin Official Website
Camphor band website
D. James Goodwin Myspace Profile
Snowflake MySpace profile
The Clubhouse Recording Studio 
Levine, Mike (2009), Electronic Musician, February 2009, "Showdown At the Clubhouse"
All Music Guide : D. James Goodwin discography