Joanna Klepko (born 25 June 1983), known by her stage name Cleo, is a Polish singer. She represented Poland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2014 in Copenhagen, Denmark along with Donatan with the song "My Słowianie".


== Career ==
She is a graduate of the Warsaw University of Life Sciences.She sang in gospel choir "Soul Connection". She is the winner of the first season of the Polish contest Studio Garaż in the category Rhythm and blues. She has worked among others with Pezet, Onar, Pih, Ramona 23, WSRH, Wet Fingers and Endefis.In 2011, she took part in the first season of the Polish talent show X Factor. Since 2013, she has worked with Donatan.On 25 February 2014, it was announced by TVP in the talk show Świat się kręci that Cleo together with Donatan, with their song "My Słowianie", will represent Poland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2014 in Copenhagen, Denmark. They finished 14th in the final, scoring 62 points. This has caused controversy as in the tele-vote result Poland was ranked 5th, with 162 points (top marks from the United Kingdom, Ireland, Norway and Ukraine). However, Poland did not receive any points from the UK and Ireland despite being first in the public voting. This occurred as both the British and the Irish juries placed them last (25th). It has been widely commented by media such as The Independent, BBC News, The Telegraph, The Guardian and the Daily Mirror.In 2015, she took part in fourth season of Taniec z Gwiazdami aired in Polsat, partnered with Jan Kliment. She was one of the favourites to win, but placed third out of eleven participants.In December that year, Cleo signed a solo record deal with Universal Music Poland and released her first single "Zabiorę Nas" on 30 December.On 13 May 2016, Cleo signed next a solo record "Wolę być" and 5 July "N-O-C".
At the end of September, Cleo was nominated for the MTV Europe Music Awards 2016 in the "Best Polish Artist" category.
In December she presented the music video for the single "Na pół".
On 26 May 2017, the re-release of her second album entitled Bastet, which was enriched with a second CD containing two new songs ("Pali się" and "Serce") and instrumental versions of songs from the album.
In June, Cleo confirmed in an interview for Plejada that she is working on material for the third studio album.
In October she presented a music video for the song "Pali się". She also recorded the Christmas song "Coraz bliżej święta" recorded for the advertising campaign of the Coca-Cola brand. On 27 November, an official music video for the song was released.On 7 February 2018, she presented the video for the single "Łowcy gwiazd", and on 6 June—a clip for the song "Eva", which she recorded in a duet with Mesajah. On 18 June 2018, she published the song "Łowcy", which is a new version of the single "Łowcy Gwiazd". 
In 2019, she released three singles, "Wrrra" and "Za Krokiem Krok" and "Kły". Since 2019, Cleo is a coach of the reality singing competition show The Voice Kids
On 6 March 2020, she released the song "Alfabet Świateł", produced by Donatan. On August 12, she realised the song "Bratnie dusze", recorded with Dawid Kwiatkowski. In December, she released the single "Number One", with a guest appearance by Weronika Juszczak. On February 9, 2021, she released the single "Kocham", for which she made a music video with the participation of several influencers


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Music videos ===


== Filmography ==


== References ==