Clarice Franco de Abreu Falcão is a Brazilian actress, singer-songwriter, screenwriter and comedian.


== Biography ==
Falcão was born in Recife, Pernambuco on 23 October 1989. She moved to São Paulo at age 4 and at age 6, she moved to Rio de Janeiro, where she has lived ever since. She was nominated for the Latin Grammy Awards of 2013 in the category of Best New Artist. She is the daughter of the writers João Falcão and Adriana Falcão, and she has two sisters Tatiana and Isabel. Clarice was also a member of a comedy group called Porta dos Fundos and she is best known for appearing on their YouTube videos.Falcão is a folk singer, who began her career at age 13 by singing the song "Para o Diabo Os Conselhos de Vocês" for the soundtrack of the movie Lisbela e o Prisioneiro. In 2007, she won a contest organized by Google and YouTube with a short-movie called Laços, directed by Célio Porto and her mother and presented at the famous Sundance Cinema Festival, in which she acted and composed the song Australia – a song which became a hit in the media. In 2008, Clarice acted as Mariana in a soap opera called A Favorita, where she shared the stage with other famous and known actors and actresses, such as Lilia Cabral. That year, she was a part of a band called Melodrama with her cousin Ricco Viana. In 2009, she acted in a remake of the play "Confessions of a Teenager" and in 2010 she starred and was responsible for directing the sound and the script of the short-movie The Phone Next Door – Chamada em Espera".
In 2011, Clarice was a part of a comedy TV show called Vendemos Cadeiras on Multishow. In 2012 and 2013, Clarice acted in movies, such as: Eu Não Faço a Menor Ideia do que Estou Fazendo com a Minha Vida (2013), O Fantástico Mundo de Gregório (2012) and others. Also in 2012, Clarice was invited to be a part of the comedy group, where she acted with Fábio Porchat and Gregório Duvivier. Falcão left the group in 2015.
In 2011, she increased her online presence with videos for song such as "A Gente Voltou" and "Qualquer Negócio". She released her first EP called Clarice Falcão – Singles on iTunes, which had 12 songs, among which there were songs she had performed on her YouTube videos, a remake of the song YMCA by the American group Village People, and a new song called De Todos os Loucos do Mundo. In 2013, she released her first album on the internet, called Monomania. In the end of 2015, Clarice recorded a version of the song Survivor by Destiny's Child in a music video, in which more than 60 women used a red lipstick however they wished to on the video.The singer's second album was released in February 2016 and it is called Problema Meu. This album was officially released and performed in Recife, Pernambuco and at Circo Voador, Rio de Janeiro, when she presented a new song called Robespierre. This album represents a new "phase" of Clarice, with songs that have a different style from her first album. Clarice states that her first CD was much simpler and that was her goal when she organized it, but she knew that for a second CD, it would be important for it to be different. According to her interview to Estadão, each song in the CD Problema Meu, tells a different story.


== Personal life ==
Clarice and Gregório Duvivier married in January 2014, however, by November that same year, ended their marriage. She identified as an atheist and a feminist.


== Songs Index ==


== References ==