Aruba Red (born in Stuttgart as Natascha Eleonoré Bruce) is a British, London-based alt-soul and trip hop musician, named after a female pirate legend. Aruba Red's music has been said to cross traditional boundaries, she has described her sound as "Alternative Soul music centred around themes of transformation and healing, influenced by trip hop, minimalist electronica, glitch, soul, acoustic folk and dub". She is also the daughter of Cream bassist, vocalist and songwriter Jack Bruce and recorded backing vocals for his last album Silver Rails which was released on 24 March 2014 on Esoteric Records. Her lyrics have been said to be passionate and intelligent, dealing with emotive subject matter. and "providing a campfire for anyone who needs to feel the warmth".


== Biography ==
Aruba Red first appeared as a featured artist on Nitin Sawhney's album London Undersound released on Cooking Vinyl in 2008, on the track Last Train to Midnight which she co-wrote. This collaboration was born out of Aruba Red being selected to work on Sawhney's project Aftershock London which led to an 18-month residency at London's Southbank Centre with artists including Camilo Tirado, Riz MC, Ayanna Witter-Johnson and Sam Carter.Other collaborations and features include Riz MC's All of You whose reissue features Plan B. Aruba Red is rumoured to be appearing on some of Riz MC's forthcoming material due for release on Brighton based independent record label Tru Thoughts. She also collaborated with Jamaican Reggae Artist Jah Cure on her track Light Up Light Up released on the Jamaican record label TAD's which was play listed on Irie FM alongside her collaboration Struggling with Reggae artist Jah Mason. A video was shot for Light Up Light Up in Montego Bay. The video was directed by Aruba Red's sister Kyla Simone Bruce who also directed the video for "Never Die" which was shot at Boardmasters Festival in 2012.
Artists Aruba Red has toured with include Maverick Sabre, Natty, Fat Freddy's Drop and Ms. Dynamite. Aruba Red has performed at festivals including Glastonbury Festival, Boardmasters Festival, Big Chill Festival, Freeze Festival, One Love Festival, Rise Festival, and Thailand's International Hot Air Balloon Festival.In 2012, Aruba Red released an EP entitled "Demos In Disguise" independently via Ditto Music. Initially the release was only available in digital format, a physical edition was later made available in 2013 featuring several bonus tracks. The digital version of the release features 5 original songs whereas the limited Red String physical edition features 8 original tracks and an acoustic mashup cover version of Nirvana's song Something in the Way and Ladysmith Black Mambazo's Homeless. There is also a live performance version of this cover featuring guitarist Charlie Laffer and cellist Ayanna Witter-Johnson: Aruba Red - Something In The Way (Nirvana) vs Homeless (Ladysmith Black Mambazo).
In March 2014, Aruba Red released a free download on her SoundCloud page, a cover of John Legend's "Set Me Free".
In March 2015, Aruba Red was featured on 'Rip Me', a song released by 'Halflife', the collaborative project between Riz MC and dubstep producer DJ Distance. In the same month, Aruba also wrote and recorded an exclusive song with Nitin Sawhney for Sawhney's BBC Radio 2 show 'Spins The Globe'. The track 'Fractured Heart' was written about the last few days Aruba spent with her late father Jack Bruce before his death on 25 October 2014.On 24 October 2015, Aruba Red performed at her father's tribute concert 'Sunshine Of Your Love - A Concert Celebrating the Life and Music of Jack Bruce' which she co-produced with Nitin Sawhney. The event featured artists including Joss Stone, Ginger Baker, Ian Anderson, Mark King, Liam Bailey and others. Aruba Red sang "We're Going Wrong" and "Folksong". Over £30,000 was raised for Bruce's local children's hospice EACH.After taking a hiatus from making music professionally, losing her father and becoming a mother, on 31 August 2018, Aruba Red made her comeback releasing an EP entitled "Holy Waters" independently via Ditto Music. The EP reached number 7 in the Top 10 iTunes Soul / RnB chart on its release date  The comeback was received positively with Aruba Red being said to have "Redefined tragedy and trauma with beautifully evocative creations becoming her mantra, with the artist taking the firestorm and creating a spellbinding, sensual rebirth." - Darryl Sterdan  and The Filtered Excellence wrote "As she ascended in during the early part of her career, the talent and the promise was always apparent. Now we are seeing it in full bloom. A much welcomed return." MixMag awarded the EP 9/10 and named it Tune Of The Month for November 2018 "A Soulful Awakening, worth the wait" – Chantelle Fiddy, and music blog Mystic Sons described the project as "a bold and atmospheric RnB delight."The EP features guest production from Nitin Sawhney and guitar by Phil ManzaneraOn 19 September online music magazine Tinnitist premiered the first music video from Holy Waters entitled "Goddess Vibes". The video became the website's most viewed song of 2018.Aruba Red signed a publishing deal with Warner/Chappell Music on 8 November 2018 In June 2019, Aruba Red was awarded the 'Transmission Fund Grant' by Help Musicians UK to support the writing of her new album On 2 November 2019, Aruba Red spoke at BBC Introducing Live on a panel discussing mental health in the music industry and in December 2019 she featured on the Elevate Music Podcast, discussing inter-generational patterns around addiction and co-dependency.On New Year's Day 2020, Aruba Red released a visual for her song "Violet Electric feat.Phil ManzaneraIn February 2020 Aruba Red released her live video Blue filmed at The Vortex Jazz Club on Blue Monday. and was interview on BBC Radio Sussex about her own experiences battling depression and escaping an abusive relationship and using art to heal.On 6 March 2020, Aruba Red released her critically acclaimed EP Shadow Work, "Aruba Red has created a great selection of songs on Shadow Work that can comfort, console, and give hope to anyone. Licks of Erykah Badu, Prince, Nitin Sawhney (a mentor to Aruba Red) and Portishead all coalesce to make a delightful mix. "All of these emotions are skilfully reflected in the musical composition and arrangement, fitting together in perfect harmony. It’s a remarkable project from this remarkable talent. Red has indeed used her blue for painting. And it’s a masterpiece"  "Aruba Red has crafted a sensual late night alt-soul soundtrack of reflection"  This release was followed with Aruba Red's debut headline concert at St Pancras Old Church on 11 March. "In this intimate, part-candlelit venue, there’s a subtle smell of incense, flickering shadows and the sense of a new spiritual awakening. There’s a new spirit of hope and redemption."On 27 April 2020, Aruba Red launched her 'Meditation Mondays' series on instagram  after hosting a guided meditation for the shesaid.so collective.


== References ==


== External links ==
Video on YouTube
Aruba Red discography at Discogs