Jeanfrançois Prins (born February 18, 1967) is a Belgian jazz guitarist, composer, vocalist and record producer.  He has spent many years between New York City and Berlin where he was leading the Jazz Guitar departments in both music universities (UdK and HfM Hanns Eisler) for a total of 12 years. Upon his return to Belgium in 2016, he became the CEO of the GAM Records label in 2017.


== Career ==
Jeanfrançois Prins began playing guitar when at eighteen years of age. A year later, he formed a band and performed in Brussels. His mentor was Toots Thielemans, who was known as a harmonica player but has started his career as a jazz guitarist. Other influences of Prins include jazz artists Lee Konitz, Miles Davis, and Kenny Werner.Prins graduated from college in with a degree in audio engineering. From 1988 to 1992, he studied jazz and guitar at the Royal Conservatory of Music, Brussels. Prins moved to New York City in 1993, he became a part of the contemporary jazz scene, to include vocalist Judy Niemack, who would later become his wife. He was the arranger/producer and guitarist for several of her albums. The two would  divorce in 2016.
Prins has performed live and recorded with Toots Thielemans, Randy Brecker, Eddie Gomez,  Gary Foster, Fred Hersch, Billy Hart, Tim Hagans, Lew Tabackin, Lee Konitz, Mal Waldron, Theo Bleckmann, Kenny Wheeler, Gary Bartz,  Victor Lewis, Cameron Brown, Jay Clayton, Jay Anderson, Ray Drummond, Adam Nussbaum, Kelvin Sholar, Kirk Nurock, Jiggs Whigham, Jim McNeely, Walter Norris, Stephen Scott, Quincy Jones, Ivan Lins, Patti Austin, and Kirk Lightsey. Since 2000, he has worked with the Berlin Jazz Orchestra.


== Recordings ==
All Around Town (TCB), was inspired as his own perceptions and musical photo album of New York City. The album is recorded trio a trio: bassist Mike Richmond and drummer Adam Nussbaum, plus saxophonist Lee Konitz as a guest. His fifth CD, Light (GAM Music), is co-led by drummer Steve Davis.
El Gaucho (Challenge, 2012) was recorded in New York City, with his NYC trio: Joris Teepe (bass) and Victor Lewis (drums) and tenor saxophonist Rich Perry as guest on specific tracks. El Gaucho is an example of his concepts of interactive trio and quartet playing with originals, standards and modern jazz compositions.
Prins' compositions are often performed and recorded, not only by his own bands, but by several other European and American jazz artists.   His composition New York Stories has been performed and recorded by numerous artists.  This list includes his own quintet, Toots Thielemans, Judy Niemack, Kenny Werner, Michel Herr and Jack van Poll.   In addition, larger and more commercial groups have used his music such as the WDR Big Band, Danish Radio Big Band, Jazz Terrassa Big Band, Lisa Werlinder and he has the title song of the Radio Judaïca Jazz Program in Belgium.  Other compositions of Prins: Central Park is recorded and performed by his trio, Ulli Jünemann's quartet; Music Calls Me by Judy Niemack (with her original English lyrics); Sommar by Lisa Werlinder.  Being a sound engineer, Prins has produced and arranged Mary Kay's CD, Make Someone Happy, featuring Toots Thielemans. He has also co-produced three CDs for Judy Niemack and others by Richard Rousselet, Walter Norris and Sören Fischer.
Prins has been featured on television both in interviews and performing in Europe, the U.S., and on the satellite channel Muzzik. In 1994, he was an actor and musician in the Belgian movie Just Friends, which won accolades and nominated for an Oscar as "Best Foreign Film". In early 1999, the French-speaking Belgian television (RTBF) produced a special documentary feature about his international career, both as a musician and educator: Brussels - Berlin – New York - Jeanfrançois Prins. It was aired on the worldwide French language channel TV5 in the summer of 1999. This was followed with an interviewed in New York City by a RTBF News team during 2006 as a report about the fifth anniversary of September 11.
Jeanfrançois has written original music for movie soundtracks as well as television to include the Discovery Channel in 2000, and the short film Coriolis in 2008.
He has also been teaching private instrument lessons and classes in Berlin's Music Universities, where he led the Jazz Guitar Departments for over a decade, at the ARTEZ Jazz School in Enschede, the Netherlands for a year, and gives workshops and master-classes in Europe and the U.S.


== Discography ==


=== As leader ===
New York Stories (GAM, 1991)
Beauty and the Prince with guests Fred Hersch and Judy Niemack (AMC, 1993, GAM, 2003)
Live at the Manhattan Jazz Club with guest Lee Konitz (GAM, 1995)
All Around Town with Mike Richmond (musician) and adam Nussbaum, guest Lee Konitz (TCB, 1999)
Light with Steve Davis (American drummer) (GAM, 2001)
El Gaucho with Victor Lewis, guest Rich Perry  (Challenge, 2012)
Avant un Rêve with Charles Loos and Sébastien Walnier (GAM, 2018)


=== As sideman ===
With Lee Konitz

1993 Rhapsody
1996 Rhapsody, Vol. 2With Judy Niemack

1992 Straight Up: with Toots Thielemans, Jeanfrançois Prins, Kenny Werner, Scott Colley, Adam Nussbaum, Peter Eldridge, Theo Bleckmann, Mark Feldman, Café,
1996 Night and the Music: with Jeanfrançois Prins (guitar, producer), Kenny Werner, Ray Drummond, Billy Hart, Erik Friedlander,
2002 About Time: with Lee Konitz, Jeanfrançois Prins (guitar, producer), Eddie Gomez, Café
2007 Blue Nights: with Gary Bartz, Jeanfrançois Prins (guitar, producer), Jim McNeely, Dennis Irwin, Victor Lewis, Don Sickler
2009 In the Sundance: with Jeanfrançois Prins (guitar, vocals, producer), Bruce Barth, Rufus Reid, Bruno CastellucciAs guest artist

1991 Make Someone Happy --- Mary Kay, with Toots Thielemans, Jeanfrançois Prins (guitar, producer), Jean Warland, Nathalie Loriers, Dré Pallemaerts,
1993 Just friends --- (Michel Herr & Archie Shepp) (movie soundtrack)
1994 Waitin' for You --- Richard Rousselet
2004 Update (44 Records) --- Berlin Jazz Orchestra
2008 And So Am I --- Darmon Meader
2012 Boo Hoo--- Ulli Jünemann
2013 Duology --- Stéphane Mercier
2013 Ornette et Cetera --- Uschi Brüning, Michael Griener, Ernst-Ludwig Petrowsky
2018 My Voice is My Plea --- Maria Palatine
2021 Songs of Berlin (GAM Music) --- Berlin Jazz Orchestra


== References ==

"Jeanfrançois Prins Biography & Teaching" All About Jazz
www.jazzleadsheets.com
sligojazz project
"Jeanfrançois Prins: El Gaucho Review" Vantroyen, Jean-Claude, Le Soir – Le Mad
"Jeanfrançois Prins Biography & Discography" Les Lundis d'Hortense, Jazz in Belgium.com


== External links ==
Official Website