Andy Paul is a Greek Cypriot singer and songwriter. He represented Cyprus with the song "Anna Maria Lena" in the Eurovision Song Contest 1984 in Luxembourg.At the Cyprus Eurovision national finals, Paul came in first, winning the spot to represent Cyprus at the international event.  Lia Vissi-Piliouri, Anna Vissi's sister, came in second at the event with the song "Htes".


== History ==
Paul is a Greek Cypriot who immigrated to the UK in the early 1960s. He became a singer and songwriter influenced by artists such as Elvis. Cliff Richard, Tom Jones and Engelbert Humperdinck.Paul started his career in a pub sponsored by Bob Whitley, singing in a talent contest. Encouraged by his friends and family to enter, he won first prize with his impersonation of his childhood idol Elvis Presley. His performance was so good, the Whitley Taverns gave him a contract. Paul went on to sing in top venues throughout the UK until his big hit with "Anna Mari-Elena". Although he was Greek, he had little contact with the Greek community; he was more of an English artist.
Andy Paul's first song was a simple melody entitled "Heartbreak Situation", produced by the now world-famous Stock, Aitken and Waterman. In the months that followed, a second release gave Paul his first big break – the song was "Anna Mari-Elena", which Andy wrote and entered in the Cypriot Eurovision Song Contest. The song went on to win the national contest, and was the entry for Cyprus in 1984. This was to be the first international hit for the Hit Factory. The next six years saw Paul touring extensively throughout Europe, gaining a following and many successes. In 1986 he released "Now That I Found You", an instant disco hit in Europe and in Greece.
Andy Paul has had all his success in Europe. After the 1984 Eurovision Song Contest, everything changed for Paul – he became a big star in the Greek music industry. He has supported big names such as Demis Roussos at the Royal Festival Hall, and worked with others in Greece and Cyprus.


== Discography ==


== References ==