Alexei Tsygankov (Belarusian: Аляксей Цыганкоў; born July 27, 1988), better known by his stage name UCast, is a Belarusian trance DJ and producer from Minsk. He also hosts his own monthly radio show, Injection at DI.fm. UCast has gained global popularity over the years and received support from top artists like Tiesto, Armin van Buuren, Paul Oakenfold, Aly & Fila, M.I.K.E., Dash Berlin, Bobina, Sean Tyas, and many others. In 2010 with a Belarusian electronic duo Poonyk&Oxide he launched his own record label LiftedSounds Records, specializes in uplifting and tech trance music.


== Life and musical career ==
Originally from Minsk, Belarus, Alexei started discovering the world of electronic music in early 90s when he heard a tape containing various hard dance tracks of that time. But the strongest influence on establishing his musical preferences carried the famous How Much is the Fish from Scooter. His acquaintance with trance music began in 2005 from such DJs as George Acosta and Armin van Buuren. UCast took his first steps into music production in 2006/2007, and very soon released  his single called Through Depth. During the next two years such tracks as Fuck The Global, Calipso, Metro, Hesperia, One Day were released. The most of them were supported by top trance artists and been played at Tiësto's Club Life, Paul van Dyk's Vonyc Sessions, Aly & Fila's Future Sound of Egypt, and have been played at their live performances as well.
At the same time he started producing, UCast began DJing and his first success came in 2009, when he was playing at Godskitchen Belarus with Sander van Doorn. After that, he was hosting such famous events as Global Gathering, Trancemission, FSOE Anniversary. In 2013 his track Genesis was awarded as "The Tune Of The Week" in the radioshow A State Of Trance and Armin van Buuren's mashup UCast vs. MaRLo "Genesis Boom" has been played during his world tour show "ASOT 600. The Expedition Tour".


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
UCast discography at Discogs