Ruensa Haxhiaj (born 19 October 1995), known professionally as Enca, is an Albanian singer and actress.She rose to fame after releasing "A po t'pëlqen" in 2014, gathering over 100,000 views on YouTube within 24 hours. Haxhia made her music debut in 2012 with "The Best Of" and "Kjo Verë". She later joined Big Basta in Kënga Magjike and continued to work with other big artists. She participated in Top Fest twice, and reached the semi-finals in her second attempt.
She also participated in Zhurma Show Awards  in 2016, where she won four awards, including the first place. She is as well the most followed albanian female artist in Albania with more than 2M followers on Instagram.


== Life and career ==
Ruensa Haxhiaj was born on 19 October 1995 in Tirana to an Albanian Orthodox family.
 She initially started posting covers on YouTube of artists like Lady Gaga, Jessie J, Rita Ora and others. She started using Keek, a social media for video statuses and gained her own fan base. She sang short parts of various songs, posted videos of her daily life, etc. She also participated in the talent show The Voice of Albania in which she failed twice in a row to pass the blind auditions.
Although her debut didn't receive big feedback, she continued working on her solo career, she was featured in many songs of big artists, mainly rappers. She participated in Top Fest twice, in 2013 and 2014. At the 2016 "Zhurma Show Awards", Enca won four awards including "Best Pop","Best Female" with "Dreq" music video and "Internet Prize", "Best Video" with "Bow Down" music video with Albanian rapper Noizy.
Haxhia announced her single "A po t'pëlqen", a Kosovar Gheg penned pop-dance song on Keek. She then released the music video in late-July and received an enormous feedback. Besides her national attention, she also gathered a big number of international fans. The song, which gathered hundreds of thousands of views within its first week.


== Discography ==


== Awards and nominations ==
Top Music Awards

Zhurma Show Awards


== References ==