Serge Polyanichko (born September 12, 1974, Rostov-on-Don, USSR) is a Russian conductor, horn player and TV presenter, artistic Director and chief conductor of the unique in the world of the Horn Orchestra of Russia(HOR), revived and enriched huge reservoir of Russian culture of the 18th and 19th centuries - Horn orchestras, which can be safely attributed to Russian national creativity along with well-known Russian Matryoshka doll. The son of the honored artist of Russia, conductor Maestro Alexander Polyanichko.


== Life and career ==
Serge Polyanichko was born in September 12, 1974 in Russia.

Serge Polyanichko began his training at the St. Petersburg State Conservatory's School for Gifted Children (with professor Vitaly Bujanovsky), Polyanichko studied the French horn (with professor Andry Glukhov) and operatic-symphonic conducting at the conservatory (with professor Ilya Musin (conductor)).

After graduating from the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, he continued his training at the St. Petersburg State Theatrical Institute and the St. Petersburg School of TV, receiving degrees from both. For several years, he worked as a television show host, while continuing to perform and furthering his training as a conductor.

After returning to music full-time, he won an international competition fot French Horn, and participated in a number of conducting master classes taught by Jorma Panula, Alexander Polyanichko, Jan Latham Koenig and Vladimir Ponykin. He also returned to the Conservatory for advanced coursework in conducting with professor Vladislav Chernushenko.


== Highlights ==
As a musician, Serge Polyanichko has collaborated with many orchestras: the Mariinsky Theatre Orchestra, the St. Petersburg Radio and TV orchestra, the Orchestra of the Academic Chapel of St. Petersburg, the Orchestra of the St. Petersburg State Conservatory, the State Academic Symphony Orchestra of the Russian Federation, and the Russian National Orchestra.

He has worked as guest concertmeister of the French Horn sections of the symphonic orchestras: Heinola Simphonietta in Finland, Nordicsymphony in Estonia, and the Philharmonic Orchestra of Santiago in Chile.


== Tours and premieres ==
Serge Polyanichko performs with several chamber ensembles, in addition to his many solo concert performances. He has toured extensively, in Finland, Denmark, Germany, Austria, France, Switzerland, Spain, Italy, Israel, Great Britain, Chile, China, and United States.

Serge Polyanichko has taken part in productions at the Opera de Monte Carlo (Boris Godunov, 2006) and the Welsh National Opera (Mazepa, 2006 and Evgeny Onegin, 2008) as a conductor-assistant. In 2006 organized and headed a small symphonic orchestra "Nevsky". The same year he organized and became Head Director of the "Horn Orchestra of Russia". In 2007 he established the "Centre of Horn Music".
Serge Polyanichko always supports the new modern music and loves to do it at the first opportunity. He participated repeatedly in the scoring works by contemporary composers, in particular, St. Petersburg composers of the "Association of Russian Tradition" he became the first performer of many works of Mikhail Zhuravlev, Vladimir Anisimoff, and others.


== Recordings ==
At the moment widely known these records in the performance of the conductor Serge Polyanichko:

Johann Sebastian Bach's "Aria" (HOR, 2009)
Gioacchino Rossini's "Overture Wilhelm tell" (fragment) (HOR, 2009)
Camille Saint-Saens "the Swan" (HOR, 2009)
Johann Strauss ' Radetzky March" (HOR, 2009)
Giulio Caccini's "Ave Maria" (HOR, 2009)
Tomaso Giovanni Albinoni "Adagio" (HOR, 2009)
Johannes Brahms "Hungarian dance No. 5" (HOR, 2009)
Antonin Dvorak Slavonic dance No. 8" (HOR, 2009)
Aram Khachaturian's "sabre Dance" (HOR, 2009)
Maurice Ravel's "Bolero" (HOR, 2009)
Boris Tishchenko "Qui Mariam" (HOR, 2009)
Vladimir Anisimoff "Sinfonia Piccola" (HOR, 2009)
Vaclav Trojan  "the Romance of the frog" (HOR, 2009)
Luigi Denza "Funiculì, Funiculà" (HOR, 2009)
Russian folk song "Ah, the wide steppe..." (HOR, 2012)
Dmitry Bortniansky "how glorious is our Lord in Zion" (HOR, 2012)
Large number of Marches of military regiments that participated in the battles of the Patriotic War of 1812 (HOR, 2012)


== External links ==
Chapel "Tavrichesky"
Horn orchestra of Russia (official website)
Virtual International Philharmonic
Mariinsky Theatre (official website)
St. Petersburg Conservatory (official website)


== References ==