Thomas Sampson, better known as TS7, is a British DJ, record producer, remixer and songwriter. He is known for his collaboration with Taylor Fowlis on the song "Heartlight (Polygon)" and his DJing, production and remixing skills within the world of UK garage and house music as well as the bassline/niche music scene alongside producers such as T2.
TS7 is also a DJ on Kiss FM and Kiss Fresh where he hosts a Thursday night show.


== Early life ==
Thomas Sampson was born and raised in Bradford, England. He was introduced to DJing and garage music at an early age and began to play in local nightclubs within the garage and bassline club scene.
It was from a young age that he realised had a huge interest in music. From the age of just 5, his parents encouraged him to have piano lessons. He went on to achieve grade 5 by the time he was 13. Producing started at the young age of 14, when he managed to get hold of the software ‘Fruityloops’ (now known as FL Studio).
Alongside production, he has toured and played shows across the UK and Europe including Ibiza, Marbella, Mallorca, Luxembourg, Turkey and Ukraine. In 2014 he made his first appearance at the iconic V-festival. Following this, in 2016 he went on to make his debut at Disclosure & Rudimental’s new Wildlife festival.


== Music career ==
After a number of successful underground releases, TS7 was given his first major label project, remixing singer Estelle's hit song "American Boy".In December 2012, TS7 signed to the talent management company 2-Tone Entertainment and shortly afterwards to Liverpool-based dance music label 3Beat Records/Universal Records. Ts7 then produced an instrumental named "Polygon". After adding a vocal from Taylor Fowlis, the song was released as "Heartlight (Polygon)" via 3Beat Records. The record received mass BBC Radio 1Xtra playlist support. The single was released on 17 February 2013 and went on to become a DJ favourite.An acoustic version was also posted online, with Fowlis performing a live version on BBC 1Xtra.In 18 July 2013, TS7 joined the UK’s Kiss FM. He first mixed from 7.00pm to 8.00pm every Saturday on the “Kiss Dance Weekend” block.
In 19 February 2015, as KissFresh, Kiss’s spinoff station, had a relaunch, TS7 was given a Saturday night slot from 11.00pm to midnight. It mainly featured the best House and Bassline beats in the mix. Later on, this slot was moved to Thursday nights, and still in use till today.
TS7 went on to release a follow-up record called "Reach". The single was released on iTunes and Beatport. He also released a number of remixes including Sigma's "Nobody to Love", which was a UK number one.TS7 has also presented Kiss FM's DJ EZ show on Thursday night several times alongside fellow Kiss FM DJs Majestic and Mike Delinquent.


== Discography ==
TS7 feat. T.Dot - Raise Your Glasses
TS7 feat. Tonia - Smile
TS7 feat. Taylor Fowlis (Tayá) - "Heartlight (Polygon)"
TS7 - Reach
TS7 - The Receptive EP


=== Remixes ===
Estelle - "American Boy"
Tujamo & Plastic Funk - "Dr. Who"
Baby Blue - "Bump"
Fuse ODG - "Antenna"
Sigma - "Nobody to Love"


== References ==