Emm Gryner (born 8 June 1975 in Sarnia, Ontario) is a Canadian singer-songwriter best known for her 1998 indie hits "Summerlong" and "Acid".


== Early life ==
Gryner's childhood was spent in Forest, Lambton County, Ontario. Her father was of half Irish heritage and her mother was Filipina.
Gryner's brother is record producer and musician Frank Gryner.


== Education ==
Gryner graduated from Fanshawe College's Music Industry Arts program in 1995.


== Career ==
Gryner started her music career in Toronto, working office jobs during the day while honing her live show in small, local clubs by night. Gryner entered her original song "Wisdom Bus" in a nationwide songwriting contest sponsored by Standard Broadcasting, and won. With the money from this prize, she recorded an album called The Original Leap Year and released it on her own Dead Daisy Records. The album attracted the attention of Violent Femmes producer, Warren Bruleigh.
Bruleigh passed the album onto an exec at Mercury Records who signed Gryner. The result was Public, a Britpop-inspired album that yielded a hit in Canada called "Summerlong." Several tours followed, with Ron Sexsmith, Bernard Butler, Rufus Wainwright and others.
After Universal Music took over Mercury Records, Gryner was dropped from the label and returned to her own Dead Daisy Records. She released several albums, two of which went on to be nominated for Best Pop Album of the Year at the Juno Awards. During this time, Gryner moved to New Paltz, NY and Los Angeles to write and tour. She also took a job singing and playing keyboards in David Bowie’s band. The gig saw Gryner performing with Bowie at Glastonbury Festival, on Later with Jools Holland and other venues around America and Europe. She appears on the live albums Glastonbury 2000 and Bowie at the Beeb, as well as Toy.
After leaving Bowie's band, Gryner moved to Montreal and released an album called Songs of Love and Death which was made up of cover versions of Irish songs by The Undertones, The Virgin Prunes, Horslips, Thin Lizzy, The Thrills and others. Recorded in a house she shared with Kate McGarrigle, the album attracted the attention of Irish media. Gryner found a champion in Pat Egan, a legendary promoter and manager based in Dublin, and he set up her first shows.
In 2005, Gryner signed Atlantic Canadian indie band In-Flight Safety. The band went on to receive national acclaim, capture several awards and receive a Juno nomination for Best Video of the Year in 2007. Gryner subsequently signed Toronto songwriter Royal Wood and released his album, A Good Enough Day through Dead Daisy.
In 2006, Gryner released  The Summer of High Hopes produced by Nathan Larson. The album was released in Canada and later in Ireland on the heels of a performance at Oxegen Festival.


== Collaborations ==
Gryner also collaborated with Larson in the band Hot One, which released an album that year. She is also a member of the collective The Cake Sale, along with Gary Lightbody of Snow Patrol, Bell X1, Josh Ritter and Glen Hansard. The collective is featured on The Cake Sale, a multi-platinum-selling Irish album with proceeds to Oxfam’s Make Trade Fair.
In 2011 Gryner formed Trent Severn with Dayna Manning and Laura C. Bates.  Their debut self-titled album was released on Gryner's Dead Daisy Records label in 2012, followed by Trillium (2015) and Portage (2017).
In May 2013, she collaborated with astronaut Chris Hadfield on a cover version of David Bowie's "Space Oddity", which was recorded partly onboard the International Space Station.In 2014, Gryner put together the band Trapper with Sean Kelly (on guitar), brother Frank Gryner (on guitar), Jordan Kern (on bass) and Tim Timleck (ex-Universal Honey on drums), playing "1980s-style melodic hard rock." In May of 2015, Trapper opened for Brit-rockers Def Leppard on 3 Canadian tour dates in Montréal, Ottawa and London, Ontario.  Gryner had met and become friends with Def Leppard lead singer Joe Elliott when she toured as a backing singer with David Bowie.On May 29, 2015, Trapper played the Great Hall in Toronto with special guest Chris Hadfield singing two songs with the band.


== Other work ==
Gryner played the angel in the music videos of "The Grace" and "Age of Consent" by Neverending White Lights, and had a small but important role in One Week, a film by director Michael McGowan.
In the summers of 2007 and 2008, Gryner and Danny Michel co-hosted the radio show Under the Covers, a show about cover songs, on CBC Radio One.
In September 2021 ECW Press released Gryner's book The Healing Power of Singing: Raise Your Voice, Change Your Life (What Touring with David Bowie, Single Parenting and Ditching the Music Business Taught Me in 25 Easy Steps), described as "part study in the art of singing, part guide to finding one's voice, and part memoir."


== Recognition by other musicians ==
Nelly Furtado named Gryner's album Science Fair one of her desert island discs in a VH1 interview, and David Bowie named Gryner and Godspeed You! Black Emperor his two favourite Canadian acts during a promotional interview for his Reality album. In the November 2006 issue of Q, celebrating the magazine's 20th anniversary, U2 frontman Bono recognized the track "Almighty Love" from Gryner's album The Summer of High Hopes as one of six songs that he wished he had written from the last twenty years of music. The American indie band +/- covered the song "Summerlong" on the Japanese edition of their EP, Holding Patterns. The song "Angel" by Matt Nathanson is written about her.


== Discography ==
And Distrust It (1995)
The Original Leap Year (1997)
Public (1998)
Science Fair (1999)
Dead Relatives (2000)
Girl Versions (2001)
The Winter (EP) (2002)
Asianblue (2002)
Songs of Love and Death (2005)
The Great Lakes (2005)
The Summer of High Hopes (2006)
PVT (2006) (originally issued as a bonus disc with The Summer of High Hopes, later sold separately)
Goddess (2009)
Stray Bullets EP (2010)
Gem and I (2010)
Northern Gospel (2011)
She's Gone: A Hall & Oates Tribute EP (2012)
The Best of Emm Gryner (2012)
FrostPop (EP) (2013)
Torrential (2014)
21st Century Ballads (2015)
Calmphonic (2016)
Aonarán (2016)
Slant (EP) (2017)
Only of Earth: Days of Games (2017)
Just for You (2020)


== References ==


== External links ==
Emm Gryner
Emm Gryner at IMDb