Andy M Wright (born 1962) is a London-based music producer, songwriter and arranger who has worked with international artists such as Simply Red and Mick Hucknall, Jeff Beck, Simple Minds,  Eurythmics, Luciano Pavarotti, Annie Lennox, Imelda May, Gibonni,  Dave Stewart, Toše Proeski,  The KLF, Natalie Imbruglia, Atomic Kitten, Massive Attack, Gianna Nannini, and Andreas Vollenweider. Since the mid 1980's, he has been involved as a programmer, musical arranger and producer on projects spanning music genres.


== The early years ==
In the mid-1980s, following an advertisement in The Melody Maker, Wright worked for a keyboard hire company in London, delivering and setting up studio equipment for recording sessions. In order to acquire a job in recording studio, he learnt to set up symthesisers and drum machines through manual books. 
In the 1990s, Wright set up a recording studio. Working as a musician/producer/programmer, he worked on The KLF hit "America:What Time Is Love?" This was followed up by a programming stint with Massive Attack on their seminal album Protection. 1995 also saw the beginning of Wright's long working relationship with Simply Red on the album Life. The number one hit "Fairground" which featured on the record owed to Wright's musical vision of blending Brazilian rhythms and trance house keyboards. After the release of Life, Wright has worked on every Simply Red, Mick Hucknall album and eight other records over eighteen years.


== The 1990s ==
in 1996, Wright collaborated on pop records for Shakespear's Sister, Imogen Heap, Sinead O'Connor and Alisha's Attic. A co-production credit for Tom Jones on the album The Lead and How To Swing It with Alan Moulder and U2 producer and Flood].
Wright stated working with Dave Stewart, experience which he qualified as 'the most interesting years of his working life'. In his opinion, Dave was 'unpredictable, always coming up with ideas, projects, adventures, and often going to faraway places to create. He was so full of positive emotions around his projects that it really seemed to create an environment that brought out the best in everyone.' In 1999 Wright was involved with the production of the Eurythmics album Peace which contained the hit singles "I Saved the World Today", "17 Again" and the title track "Peace".


== 2000 onwards ==
In 2000, Wright began working with Jeff Beck. The resulting album, You Had It Coming, produced a Grammy award-winning track "Dirty Mind" in the best rock instrumental performance category. He also provided singles "Reach" on S Club 7 and "Bring It All Back", as well as, co-production for Eurythmics "Peace Is Just A Word".
In 2001, Wright score a UK number one single with Atomic Kitten's "Eternal Flame", this was followed by production of Gianna Nannini's album Aria' in 2002.
In 2003, Wright and Jeff Beck worked together again on the eponymously titled album Jeff. This produced the Grammy winning track, "Plan B", also in the best rock instrumental performance category. Wright's production in 2003 also included the "Sunrise", the first track off the album Home by Simply Red, work on "A Thousand Beautiful Things" for Annie Lennox, plus the song "Caruso" for the Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti on the album "Ti Adoro".
2004 / 2005 involved extensive work for Simply Red including co-production of the album Simplified.
In 2006, Wright began his collaboration with Macedonian artist Toše Proeski on songs for the album The Hardest Thing. Toše was killed in a road accident in October 2007 - he was twenty-six years old. He was given a state funeral on 17 October 2007 in his home town of Krusevo. The Hardest Thing was released posthumously in January 2009 and reached the top of the charts all over the Balkan region.
Later in the year, Wright worked with Soho Dolls, chart-topping Icelandic popsters, Nylon, and further projects for Simply Red.
In 2007, he was kept busy on Stay, the final Simply Red album.
Lastly in 2008, Wright worked on production of Mick's first solo album post-Simply Red: Tribute to Bobby.


=== Highlights from recent projects ===
2020 - co-production of 'Blue Eyed Soul' Simply Red's 12th Studio Album - which debuted at no 6 on the UK album chart 2019 - Simple Minds album (mixing) 'Live in the City of Angels'. The album was a UK top 10 hit 2018 - produced the hit 80s Symphonic album for BMG recorded at Abbey Road Studios with a fifty-piece symphony orchestra. This album features new arrangements and original performances of some of the biggest international hits of the 1980s.
2018 - co-produced the Echo and the Bunnymen album The Stars The Oceans and The Moon - a top 20 hit in the UK charts (peaking at #11).
2018 - co-produced Simple Minds album Walk Between Worlds - a top 5 five hit in the UK, the band's first in over twenty years (peaking at #4) The record was also a Radio 2 Album of the Week.
2017 - Simple Minds' lead singer Jim Kerr posted about dining with Wright in London. Kerr referred to Wright and Gavin Goldberg - the masterminds behind 2014's well-received Big Music album - as the band's producers. This indicates the team produced Simple Minds' untitled new studio album, due late 2017 or in 2018.2017 - co-produced the Nell Bryden album Bloom. The record was selected as a Radio 2 Album of the Week2016 - co-produced Simple Minds album Acoustic. Record achieved top twenty status (peaked at 16 in UK)2016 - co-produced the Keith Harkin album On Mercy Street - the record reached number one on the 'World Music' Billboard charts.2015 - co-produced Simply Red's warmly received 30 year anniversary album Big Love which entered  the UK album charts at number  four.
2014 - co-produced the critically acclaimed album Big Music with Simple Minds2014 - produced and co-wrote album 'Magnetic' for international solo artist Miel - due for release in 2015.
2014 - produced and co-wrote debut album for Purdy, retro-style songstress with a modern approach.
2013 - saw the release of 20th Century Man, an album produced for Croatian rock musician Gibonni.
2012 - produced and co-wrote vocalist Peter Grant's album Too Close
2011 - worked on a second solo album project for Mick Hucknall, American Soul, making that their 8th studio collaboration. The record achieved double gold status in the UK and garnered both 'Single of the week' and 'Album of the week' accolades on BBC Radio 2
2010 - worked on two charity records. One in aid of the Haiti earthquake, a cover of "I Put a Spell on You", the Screamin' Jay Hawkins track. The line-up included Nick Cave, Bobby Gillespie of Primal Scream, Paloma Faith, Chrissie Hynde, Glen Matlock of the Sex Pistols, Mick Jones of The Clash and actor Johnny Depp on guitar. The other track for charity was put together for Oxfam to use in conjunction with film at the G8 Summit. Jim Kerr from Simple Minds and Martha Wainwright recorded "Promised You A Miracle", a classic Simple Minds track.
2010 - worked with the rising rockabilly star Imelda May on her breakthrough album Mayhem - widely critically acclaimed and a UK Top 10 hit.2009 - produced classical musician Diana Yukawa's album The Butterfly Effect. The album was a pop classical hybrid recorded at Wright's regular haunt for live music recordings, Abbey Road Studios.


== Credits ==
An extensive list of Wright's work is catalogued on AllMusic and Discogs.


== References ==