Alan "Skip" Moore (born 1 January 1950) is a British musician who is best known as the third official drummer of heavy metal band Judas Priest. He played on their second album, Sad Wings of Destiny (1976).
Moore was already active in the Birmingham rock, blues, folk and country scene, and played with numerous bands, including The Young Casuals, The Other Lot, The Outer Light, Gabriel Oak, Glad Stallion, Tendency Jones and Pendulum. He was first approached by the guitarist K. K. Downing and bass guitarist Ian Hill in 1971, and joined in the early and unofficial phase of the newborn Judas Priest for a period of about a year, while  Al Atkins was still the vocalist. He left in 1972 to join the Birmingham country rock band Sundance, with whom he recorded the album Rain, Steam, Speed (1974), and the single "Coming Down".
In 1975, the drummer John Hinch left Judas Priest and Downing and Hill approached Moore again. For the second time, he joined the band, making him the only drummer in its history to have two separate stints. His first show after re-joining was in October 1975 at Slough College, London, during which the guitarist/backing vocalist Glenn Tipton introduced "our new drummer Skip" who "only had a few hours of rehearsal". In 1976, the band recorded the album Sad Wings of Destiny. Despite its success, Moore decided to leave again, only this time permanently.
Moore continued to play with numerous other bands and recording sessions. In 1981, he signed to Ariola Records with the band R.P.M., releasing two singles, "Now That Summer's Here" and "Lost In Space". After moving out of London, he continued to play with various "scratch bands" and session musicians. He later left music for a while and more or less faded into anonymity.
Over the years, several musical biographers, journalists, band members and fans had tried to trace him without success. In the official biography The Story of Judas Priest: Defenders of the Faith, the author Neil Daniels said that, at the time it was written, Moore was the only former member of the band he could not trace at all.


== References ==


== External links ==
Alan Moore discography at Discogs