Nathan Ross is an American film and television producer.


== Personal life ==
Ross grew up in Northbrook, Il and graduated from Glenbrook North High School. He is an Indiana University alumnus and a John Marshall Law School graduate.Prior to becoming a producer, he was an agent at ICM Partners from 2003–10, primarily representing directors and screenwriters for film.He was profiled by The Hollywood Reporter in November 2008 in their "Next Gen 35 Under 35", which recognizes entertainment executives in their yearly issue.Ross got engaged to Elizabeth Chavez December 5, 2018 in Bali.


== Film production ==
Ross was an executive producer on Dallas Buyers Club (starring Matthew McConaughey and Jared Leto, both of whom won Academy Awards for their performances) alongside his directing partner, Jean-Marc Vallée. It was released by Focus Features on November 1, 2013 and won three Academy Awards (including Best Picture) and was nominated for six in total.He was also executive producer on Wild, directed by Vallée for Fox Searchlight, starring Reese Witherspoon and Laura Dern, both of whom were nominated for Academy Awards. The film was released on December 3, 2014.Ross' most recent film release was Demolition, which Vallée also directed, and starred Jake Gyllenhaal, Naomi Watts, and Chris Cooper, for Fox Searchlight. It was released April 8, 2016 and won the "Headliners Audience Award" at the 2016 SXSW Film Festival.Ross’ next film will be the story of John Lennon and Yoko Ono for Universal Pictures. “Its the first time Yoko is allowing her story to be told,” and “We wanted to bring the right type of intimacy to the storytelling,” Ross told Rolling Stone in an interview for the August 2019 issue.


== Television ==
Ross is an Executive Producer on the HBO series, Big Little Lies, an adaptation of Liane Moriarty's 2014 darkly comic novel about three mothers of kindergartners, starring Nicole Kidman and Reese Witherspoon. The show premiered in February 2017. It won 8 Emmys at the 69th Annual Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Limited Series, with 16 overall nominations. At the 75th Annual Golden Globes, Big Little Lies won 4, including Best Limited Series or TV Movie, out of 6 nominations. The second season aired in 2018 with Merryl Streep added to the cast.Ross is also an Executive Producer alongside Jean-Marc Vallee on an adaptation of Gillian Flynn's debut thriller novel Sharp Objects. The limited series stars Amy Adams, Patricia Clarkson, and Chris Messina.Among its accolades, Clarkson won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film and Adams received a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film. It also received eight nominations at the 71st Primetime Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Limited Series and acting nominations for Adams and Clarkson.
In 2020, Ross’ Crazyrose set up The Players Table with Endeavor Content at HBO Max, which will star Sydney Sweeney and Halsey and to be written and directed by Annabelle Attanasio.Ross and Vallée’s Crazyrose will also executive produce The Lady In the Lake for Apple. This straight to series limited mystery will star Academy Award winners Natalie Portman and Lupita Nyong’o and will be directed by Alma Har’el. Endeavor Content is the studio.


== Production Company ==
Ross is a co-founder of Crazyrose, a film and television production and financing company, founded with Vallée in partnership with Bloom and Endeavor Content. In 2021, the company signed a first look deal with HBO and HBO Max.The duo commented "We are honored to formalize our long and fruitful relationship with HBO and to begin a new one with HBO Max. “We are grateful to Casey, Frannie, and Sarah for their continued partnership and look forward to supporting and promoting storytellers we admire in this next stage for Crazyrose.” The company will also continue its relationship with Endeavor Content by extending its first look film and forming a second look television deal with them.


== References ==


== External links ==
Nathan Ross at IMDb