Miles Tackett is best known around the world as bassist/leader of Breakestra, a funk, soul-jazz band whose records & live shows are a throwback to the pre-sampling era of Bronx DJ performances. "Music Man Miles", as he is known among the underground DJ crowd, also helms the longest-running funky soul party in Los Angeles spinning an all-vinyl set.Tackett’s musical reputation extends well beyond the underground clubs of Los Angeles. He has performed and collaborated with a wide range of artists, including Blind Melon, B.B. King, Damien Marley, Little Feat, Macy Gray and legendary soul singer Syl Johnson. After years of focusing on a purist funk style and sound with Breakestra, Tackett has taken some time to write new songs using his first love, the electric guitar. Miles has released his most personal album yet, the soulful, guitar-centric The Fool Who Wonders. With an array of influences that draw from vintage soul, rhythm and blues, psychedelic, and blues/jazz influenced folk and rock, this album’s new vintage sound brings Tackett’s varied musical travels back to his roots.


== Biography ==
Miles Tackett was raised on the sounds of 60s/70s gumbo rock while growing up in the Santa Monica Mountains of Topanga Canyon. His father is Fred Tackett, the multi-instrumental member of 70s American rock band Little Feat.
While in his teens, Miles co-formed the soulful-funky-melodic rock band The Inclined and in 1993 they released Bright New Day (Columbia). In 1999, Breakestra released the Miles Tackett produced & composed his first deep funk track Getcho Soul Togetha on Stones Throw Records which featured him on drums, bass & guitar along with Mixmaster Wolf on vocals. A full length Breakestra record “the Live Mix tape part 2” on Stones Throw soon followed displaying the seamless, live medley style “band as the funk/hip hop Dj” concept featuring covers of deep & classic funk/soul/jazz that had been sampled in golden era hip hop records which is where he & other orange original members in Breakestra like keyboardist Carlos Guaico & vocalist Mixmaster Wolf had first the tracks. A few years later after securing a deal with Ubiquity Records Miles composed, produced, and played on Breakestra's Hit the Floor which included all-original songs. Tackett and Breakestra appear on the soundtrack for the 2005 Tony Hawk's American Wasteland video game. In late 2009, Breakestra led by Miles Tackett put together the full-length CD, Dusk Till Dawn, another all original funky-soul-jazz collection that featured guest rapper Chali 2na, the late DJ Dusk and soul vocalist Afrodyete the "African Goddess of Love".
In addition to the live performing & recording in 1999 Miles had started collecting hip hop & funk vinyl which led him to start djing at his Root Down party underground Hip hop party. Soon after in 2000 he felt there was a need for a dj dance party night that focused on the deep funky soul music he loved so Along with Dj Egon & Cut Chemist he started the long running Funky Sole vintage vinyl dance party that even now in 2018 happens every Saturday at the Echo in Echo Park where Miles is promoter & Resident Dj along with guests.


== Discography ==
Solo Projects:

 The Fool Who Wonders (The Root Down, Los Angeles) 2014
Out Of Time Out Of Mind (Global Muse, Japan) 2007
Miles Tackett Produced Albums:

‘’ The Fool Who Wonders’’ (Root Down) 2014
 Dusk Till Dawn (Strut Records) 2009
 Hit The Floor (Ubiquity Records) 2005
 The Live Mix Part 2 (Stones Throw Records) 2000
 Live Mix Part 1 (Stones Throw Records) 1998Miles Tackett Produced EPs:

 Joyful Noise (Strut Records) 2009
 Stand Up (Ubiquity Records) 2006
‘’ Ring of Fire ‘’ Johnny Cash/June Carter Cover (45 only)2004
‘’ Deuces Up Double Down’’ 45 single 2001
 Yesterdays New Quintet / Breakestra / Mr Dibbs* - Suite For Weldon (Stones Throw Records) 2003
 Remember Who You Are • Cramp Your Style • Baby Don't Cry (Rapster Records) 2001
Dj Music Man Miles mixes
‘’Funky Sole Vol.1’’ 2003


== References ==


== External links ==
Miles Tackett Discography at Discogs