Lynn Breedlove (also known as Lynnee Breedlove) is an American musician, writer, and performer who was born in Oakland, California, United States.


== Early life ==
Lynn Breedlove was born in and grew up in the San Francisco Bay Area area during early childhood and then lived in Alameda and Oakland, California as a teenager. Breedlove's father was a high school teacher of partial Native American ancestry and Breedlove's mother was a secretary who originally hailed from Germany. Breedlove was an only child.


== Tribe 8 and The Homobiles ==
Breedlove is the queer founding member and lead singer of the San Francisco dyke punk band Tribe 8. The band's first single, Pigbitch, was released on Harp records, run by Gina Harp in 1991. The second single, There's a Dyke in the Pit, with Bikini Kill, 7 Year Bitch, and the Lucy Stoners was released by the queercore record label Outpunk in 1992, and later releases were on the independent record label Alternative Tentacles.  The band appeared on film in A Gun For Jennifer and also performed in She's Real, Worse Than Queer, and Rise Above: A Tribe 8 Documentary by Tracy Flannigan.
Breedlove has performed at the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival, and criticized the festival's trans-exclusionary policies. Tribe 8 also played at the San Francisco Transgender March, multiple Ladyfests and LGBT Pride Festivals, including Europride 2000 in Rome, Italy.In 2015, Breedlove returned to playing music with the emergence of his new band, The Homobiles, billed as a "queer-punk supergroup", with Ed Varga, founder of Homo A Gogo, songwriter Mya Byrne, Fureigh (former guitarist for The Shondes), Stephany Ashley (executive director of St. James Infirmary Clinic), and Corrie Bennett.


== Spoken word, open mike, and radio shows ==
Breedlove has performed spoken word on Sister Spit tours, and from 2000 to 2006 he and Tara Jepsen co-hosted a monthly sexuality and gender identity-based cultures open mike in San Francisco called K'vetch. Breedlove MC'd the 3rd Annual SF Trans March in '07.Starting in 2004, Breedlove created the comedy solo show Lynnee Breedlove’s One Freak Show which has been touring the U.S., Canada, and Europe in 5 languages. A book based on this show with the same title was published by Manic D Press in 2009. The book, Lynnee Breedlove’s One Freak Show, won the 2010 Lambda Literary Award for Transgender Literature.Since 2004, Breedlove often hosts Gender Pirates, a monthly benefit for the group United Genders of the Universe in San Francisco, and has hosted the Unka Lynnee Show on Pirate Cat Radio (formerly the Unka Lynnee & Aunty Cindy Show with Cindy Emch), as well as taught Unka Lynnee's Skool 4 Boyz at The Harvey Milk Institute. The column, "Uncle Lynnee's Skool For Bois," ran for two years at On Our Backs magazine and twice as "Unka Lynnee's Skool 4 Boyz" at Velvet Park Magazine.In May 2013, Breedlove appeared on Music Life Radio, discussing Tribe 8, and Homobiles, the new LGBTQ ride sharing non-profit service founded by Breedlove in San Francisco.


== Homobiles Non-Profit ==
Breedlove is the founder of the San Francisco based non-profit Homobiles, a California NPO 501c3 committed to providing secure and reliable transit to the SF Bay Area LGBTIQQ community and its allies. Homobiles is credited by Sidecar Co-Founder Sunil Paul as the first peer-to-peer ridesharing service in the United States and the inspiration for Sidecar's business model.Homobiles officially launched their donation-based community mutual aid service in 2011 after Breedlove first began giving rides in 2010 - to protect drag performers and people who didn't feel safe or wouldn't be picked up by traditional taxi services.
They serve not just SF's queer community but people of color, and allies. Homobiles is also credited by members of the business community with pioneering the operating model that helped lead to Lyft and Uber's success.


== Godspeed and Freak Show ==
In 2002, Breedlove's first novel, Godspeed, was published by St. Martin's Press. The main character of the book is a methamphetamine-using bicycle messenger named Jim. The main character is said to be based on Breedlove's years as an addict. In 2007, a German translation of the novel was published, titled Götterspeed on Mox und Moritz.
Godspeed was produced as a short film, starring Breedlove as Jim, the antihero, Ad-Rock of the Beastie Boys as the dispatcher, and Jillian Lauren, aka Sparkle Diamonds of the LA burlesque troupe Velvet Hammer, as the stripper love interest. It features music by Tribe8, Lunachicks, The Gossip, Katastrophe, MDC, All The Pretty Horses, Bikini Kill, Le Tigre, Blatz, and Dirtbox. Breedlove co-directed with Jen Gilomen and co-produced with Kami Chisholm, wrote the script and starred in the film. Music supervision provided by Kathleen Hanna, and art directed by Vega Darling.
Breedlove's other published books are Lynnee Breedlove’s One Freak Show and 45 Thought Crimes, published by Manic D Press in 2009 and 2019, respectively.


== Honors and awards ==

In November 2019, Breedlove was commended by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors during Transgender Awareness Week.


== Personal life ==
Breedlove is a trans man. Breedlove was featured in the 2016 documentary, Queercore: How to Punk a Revolution, directed by Yony Leyser.


== Filmography ==
A Gun For Jennifer, 1996
She's Real, Worse Than Queer by Lucy Thane, 1997
Dope on Dope by Shon Kayli, 1998
Step Up and Be Vocal, Interviews zu Queer Punk und Feminismus in San Francisco by Uta Busch und Sandra Ortmann, (2001) Bremen, Germany, 60 min
Rise Above: A Tribe 8 Documentary by Tracy Flannigan, 2003
Godspeed by Lynn Breedlove and Jen Gilomen, 2007


== References ==


== External links ==
Lynn Breedlove Official Website
Tribe 8 Official Website (archived)
Homobiles Official Website
The Homobiles Bandcamp Page