Ralphi Rosario is an American house musician an founding member of the influential Chicago DJ group Hot Mix 5.


== Biography ==
When Hot Mix 5 was formed in 1981 on radio station WBMX (now WVAZ), Rosario, the youngest member of the group, was still in high school. The Hot Mix 5 went on to become one of the leading forces in the early Chicago house music scene.
Like other members of the group, Rosario eventually branched out into music production and remixing. His first release, made in collaboration with Vince Lawrence, was "Sample That!" in 1986 under the name Bang Orchestra. In 1987, his collaboration with Xaviera Gold, "You Used to Hold Me", became a big hit for Rosario that was subsequently remixed and re-released several times.
Rosario continues to work as a DJ and remixer and has released several albums. He has remixed tracks by artists including INXS, the Shamen, Jomanda, Culture Beat, Gloria Estefan, Deee-Lite, Pet Shop Boys, Madonna, Kylie Minogue, Giorgio Moroder, Michael Bublé, Mariah Carey, Ricky Martin, Kelly Clarkson, Pussycat Dolls, Goldfrapp, Rihanna, Taio Cruz, Katy Perry, and Beyoncé.
On December 1, 2011, it was announced that Rosario, with producing partner Abel Aguilera, received a 2012 Grammy nomination for the Rosabel Club Mix of the Rihanna track "Only Girl (In the World)".
In 2015, his single featuring Julissa Veloz, "La Jungla", gained many positive reviews.In 2016, his collaboration with Abel Aguilera under their Rosabel alias, gave Rosario another Billboard Dance Chart #1 single with "Livin' for Your Love (Your Love)" (Carrillo Music). This is his sixth #1 single with Aguilera under Rosabel and features the vocals of singer Jeanie Tracy.In December 2016, Rosario notched his second solo Billboard Dance Chart #1 single for "Button Pusha" which features the vocals of Aneeta Beat. "Button Pusha" is the third charting hit from Rosario's 2 Sides to the Story album. The others charting singles include "La Jungla" featuring Julissa Veloz. and "F*ck Your Boyfriend" featuring Francesca CatalanoIn May 2017, his latest collaboration with Abel Aguilera under their Rosabel alias, garnered Rosario another Billboard Dance Chart #1 single with "Anthem of House". This is his seventh #1 single with Aguilera under Rosabel and features the vocals of singer Terri Bjerre.In 2019, Rosario with Abel Aguilera announced their first ever studio album under their Rosabel alias. The duo named the project The Album. Rosabel's 14 song album featured singers Jeanie Tracy, Terri Bjerre and Tamara Wallace. Rosario and Aguilera worked once again with Rod Carrillo at Carrillo Music to oversee The Album, and shortly after Rosabel announced a tour in support for their new music. The Album was released on April 26, 2019 


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
45 Miles of Nerves Ralphi Rosario (Underground Construction/Afterhours)
2 Sides to the Story- Ralphi Rosario (Carrillo Music)
The Album- Rosabel (Carrillo Music)


=== Singles ===
"You Used to Hold Me"
"La Jungla" featuring Julissa Veloz
"F*ck Your Boyfriend" featuring Francesca Catalano
"Button Pusha" featuring Aneeta Beat


=== Remixes ===
The Absolute featuring Suzanne Palmer - I Believe
Amy Grant - Find a Way
Ariana Grande featuring Big Sean - Right There
Assia Ahhatt - If Only Tonight
B Howard - DSYLM
Bang Orchestra - Sample That
Barry Manilow - Copacabana
Beyoncé - Irreplaceable
Beyoncé - Grown Woman
Bonnie Tyler - Two Out of Three Ain't Bad
BWO - Right Here Right Now
Celine Dion - Taking Chances
Cher - A Different Kind of Love Song
Cyndi Lauper - Same Ol' Story
Dave Audé feat. Luciana - Something For The Weekend
Dave Audé feat. Andy Bell - Aftermath (Here We Go)
David Longoria - Zoon Baloomba
DJ Fenix & Lisa Williams - California Sun
Donna Summer - I Got Your Love
Donna Summer - Fame (The Game)
Donna Summer - Hot Stuff 2018 (with Erick Ibiza)
Emii - Mr. Romeo
Emin Agalarov featuring Nile Rodgers - Boomerang
Enrique Iglesias - Do You Know? (The Ping Pong Song)
Garbage - Bleed Like Me
Giorgio Moroder featuring Kylie Minogue - Right Here, Right Now
Gloria Estefan - You'll Be Mine (Party Time)
Gloria Estefan - Tres Deseos
Gloria Estefan - Hotel Nacional
Gloria Estefan - Hotel Nacional
Goldfrapp - Anymore
Heidi Montag - More Is More
Ivy Queen - Que Lloren
Janet Jackson - Feedback
Janet Jackson - Make Me
Jeanie Tracy - Can't Take My Eyes Off You
Jeanie Tracy - Keep The Party Jumpin
Jeanie Tracy - Cha Cha Heels
Jennifer Lopez featuring Pitbull - On The Floor
Jesse McCartney - Leavin
Jessica Sutta - Show Me
Joe Jonas - Love Slayer
Jordan Knight - Give It To You
Justin Timberlake featuring Beyoncé- Until The End Of Time
KC and the Sunshine Band - I Love You More
KC and the Sunshine Band & Bimbo Jones - I'm Feeling You
KC and the Sunshine Band - We Belong Together
Kelly Clarkson - Walk Away
Kelly Rowland feat. David Guetta - Commander
Kerli - Walking on Air
Lady Gaga and Ariana Grande - Rain on Me
Liza Fox - Gimme All (Ring My Bell)
Madonna - Erotica
Madonna  - Love Profusion
Malea - Give
Mariah Carey - Don't Forget About Us
Mariah Carey - I Stay in Love
Mariah Carey - Up Out My Face
Mariah Carey - Auld Lang Syne (The New Year's Anthem)
Matchbox 20 - How Far We've Come
Michael Bublé - Save The Last Dance For Me
Michael Bublé - Spider-Man Theme
Michael Bublé - Sway
Mýa - Movin' On
Mylène Farmer & Sting - Stolen Car
Nelly Furtado featuring Timbaland - Promiscuous
Noelia - My Everything
Noelia - Spell featuring Timbaland
Pet Shop Boys - Did You See Me Coming
Pet Shop Boys - To Step Aside
Princess X - Gimme All (Ring My Bell)
Pussycat Dolls - Don't Cha
Pussycat Dolls - When I Grow Up
Pussycat Dolls - Hush Hush
Ricky Martin featuring Fat Joe & Amerie - I Don't Care
Ricky Martin - Pégate
Ricky Martin - Más/Freak of Nature
Ricky Martin - Come with Me
Rihanna featuring David Guetta - Right Now
Rod Stewart - Da Ya Think I'm Sexy?
Rod Carrillo - Alegre
Rod Carrillo & Terri Bjerre - You Got What I Need
RuPaul - Cha Cha Bitch
Samantha Mumba - Lately
Selena Gomez & the Scene - Naturally
Spice Girls - Spice Up Your Life
Stevie Nicks - Stand Back
Tami Chynn featuring Akon - Frozen
The Tamperer featuring Maya Days - "If You Buy This Record (Your Life Will Be Better)"
Taio Cruz - Dynamite
Yenn - Pretty Ugly
Yoko Ono - Everyman… Everywoman…
Yoko Ono - Give Me Something
Yoko Ono - Wouldnit (I'm a Star)
Yoko Ono - Move on Fast
Yoko Ono - Talking to the Universe
Yoko Ono - She Gets Down on Her Knees
Yoko Ono - I'm Moving On
Yoko Ono - Hold Me feat. Dave Aude
Yoko Ono - Walk on Think Ice
The Wanted - All Time Low
Zendaya - Replay (Zendaya song)
Katy Perry - Swish Swish
Donna Summer - Hotstuff
Anngun - What we remember
Goldfrapp - Anymore
Goldfrapp - Sister Magic


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ralphi Rosario on Discogs