Todd Moscowitz is a music industry executive.  He is currently the founder and CEO of Alamo Records and the manager of Gucci Mane.  Previously, Moscowitz co-founded 300 Entertainment, served as a co-president and CEO of Warner Bros. Records and worked for Def Jam.


== Career ==
While attending law school, Moscowitz worked for Rush Communications. After graduating from NYU, Moscowitz worked as a lawyer in the mergers and acquisitions department of the international law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom for a year before being asked by Lyor Cohen to rejoin the company as the head of Rush Communications, the holding company for all of the entertainment assets of Cohen and partner Russell Simmons.Moscowitz took the titles of President of Def Jam Music Publishing, President of Def Jam Interactive Gaming, and a member of the
Board of Directors of Phat Farm Inc. One year later the title of SVP of Business Affairs for Def Jam Recordings. Shortly thereafter, he was elevated
to the title of General Manager of Def Jam Records. In 2000 after overseeing the sale of Def Jam Records to Universal Music Group and the subsequent merger of the staffs, Moscowitz left to rejoin his old friends Lighty (Chris Lighty) and Scott (Mona Scott-Young) at Violator. In 2004 he became the President of Asylum Records. Moscowitz later served as co-president and CEO of Warner Bros. Records from September 14, 2010 to January 2013.In 2013, he co-founded independent label, 300 Entertainment with Lyor Cohen, Roger Gold, Kevin Liles in partnership with Twitter. The label currently includes Fetty Wap, Young Thug, Eric Bellinger, YNW Melly, Alex Winston, Shy Glizzy, Gunna, Tee Grizzley, Lil Keed, Jacquie Lee, Highly Suspect, Panama, Cheat Codes and Megan Thee Stallion, among others. Atlantic Records, a sister of Warner Bros. Records, distributes releases of 300 Entertainment.
In late 2016, he founded Cold Heat Records, which later renamed to Alamo Records, under Interscope Records. He later signed artists including Blackbear, Lil Gotit, Smokepurpp, Wifisfuneral and more to the label. Sony Music Entertainment acquired Alamo Records in June 2021.Moscowitz is the manager of Gucci Mane.


== References ==