Chia-Hui Lu (Chinese: 盧佳慧; pinyin: Lú Jiāhuì) is a Taiwanese classical pianist.
Lu is active in the cultural arts community in Taiwan.  She is a director of the Egret Foundation, a non-profit organization that promotes Taiwan culture and arts.  She is a faculty member of the National Taiwan University of Arts and the Affiliated Senior High School of National Taiwan Normal University. For her album Enchanted  she transcribed Isaac Albeniz's Tango in D. For her album Amore, Lu composed Butterfly Orchid.


== Classical Music Performances ==
Lu is a classical pianist by training and have played many concerts around the world.  In New York City, Lu has performed recitals at Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall and Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center.  In Europe, Lu performed at the Rome National Music Festival and Vasto Italy Festival.  She also performed a recital in Barletta, Italy.
In Taiwan, Lu performed "An Evening of Fantasy with the Taipei Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra, "Care for Taiwan's Land Restoration Concert" - Robert Schumann's Concerto in A Minor with Philharmonia Moment Musical, "Sound Of Formosa" - the Piano Concerto premiere of Gordon Shi-Wen Chin with the National Symphony Orchestra, and "Evening of Dance" - Piano Recital, among others.


== Cross Art Works ==
Lu's Amore cross art work  mixed a classical recital with animated visuals created from Paul Chiang's paintings. Her Water on Fire piano recital  incorporated visuals and poetry, in a social networking experience.  Lu curated artwork from over thirty seven reputable artists at the  IMPRESSION OF TAIWAN @ART TAIPEI EXHIBITION.
Lu was the Music Director for Sayion I  and Sayion II, which incorporated music with dancers that are suited up in sensors that controlled the visual background.  In collaboration with IF+, Lu produced Obsession  harnessing XR (Extended Reality) technology. XR extends existing VR (virtual reality), AR (augmented reality) and MR (mixed reality) technologies.


== Awards ==
1987, First prize winner of the Taipei seventy-sixth solo piano music competition
1990, winner of the seventy-eighth Junior solo piano music competition at the Southern District of Taipei
1991, winner of the eightieth youth piano solo music competition in the Southern District of Taipei
2000, winner of the 28th Anniversary Artists International's Young Artists Award
2003, winner of the 30th Anniversary Artists International's Young Artists Outstanding Alumni Award


== References ==


== External links ==
Chia-Hui Lu's YouTube Channel
National Taiwan University of Arts Music Department