Yonatan Gat is a producer, guitarist and composer based in New York. His cross-genre work was called "a vital new music form" by a "legendary live performer" by Magnet Magazine, "melding punk, improvisation, world music, and avant garde".His performances were so controversial in his home country of Israel that his first band Monotonix got banned from playing shows in almost all venues of the country, leading Gat to leave his country for a decade of touring in which he gave 1,500 concerts in 30 countries. Rolling Stone editor David Fricke celebrated the multiculturalism of Gat's sound, calling him "a citizen of the world," adding "Gat wields his guitar like a universal translator."After relocating to Paris, Porto, and New Orleans, Gat found a home in New York, where his work was profiled by The New York Times, Rolling Stone, The Wire, UNCUT, Pitchfork, NPR, Vice, The New Yorker and People Magazine. The Village Voice named him "Best Guitarist in New York, 2013," and The Guardian listed his sophomore album Universalists in their top ten Contemporary Classical Music albums of 2018,  while PopMatters called it a "Visionary New Album for Rock Music, rearranged electronically in unpredictable ways that suggest Teo Macero, DJ Screw, Yeezus-era Kanye West, but not much else in rock music".


== Biography ==


=== As Founding Member of Monotonix (2000s) ===
Gat first came to prominence as the guitarist and founder of punk band Monotonix. After finding themselves banned from most venues in their country due to the wild and controversial nature of their concerts, the band decided to leave Israel and tour the United States and Europe. With Monotonix, Gat released an EP and two albums on Drag City Records. Gat's guitar was the only harmonic instrument in the drums-guitar-vocals power trio and was singled out by the likes of Pitchfork mentioning "guitarist Yonatan Gat slides in and out of solos without ever throwing the rhythm off the rails... The descending guitar line that follows is sweet and yearning enough to fit onto a damn Strokes record."During the band's 5-year existence, they played 1,000 concerts, collaborated with musicians such as Fugazi's Ian Mackaye and Guy Picciotto and Beat Happening and K Records founder Calvin Johnson, while touring as support for Pavement, Faith No More and Silver Jews. The latter's frontman David Berman would go on to co-produce Gat's 2018 sophomore LP Universalists. Songs by Monotonix were used in TV, film and video games such as  House, Grand Theft Auto and  Better Living Through Chemistry. In 2008, Monotonix were called "the most exciting live band in rock 'n' roll" by Spin Magazine. By 2011, after completing a world tour for their final album,  Not Yet, the band stopped touring, which allowed Gat to focus on his career as a solo artist.


=== As Solo Artist ===
After Monotonix's final world tours in 2011, Gat went on to earn a Bachelor of Arts in anthropology from Columbia University School of General Studies. Harmony Korine wrote the letter of recommendation for his application. Soon after Gat settled in New York, he began recording and performing as a bandleader and solo artist, engaging Gal Lazer (drums) and Sergio Sayeg (bass) as his core studio-collaborators while expanding his projects to include musicians such as Brian Chase (Yeah Yeah Yeahs), Greg Saunier (Deerhoof) and Thor Harris (Swans).Gat began touring the United States and Europe both as headliner and sharing the stage with artists such as Thee Oh Sees and Sun Ra Arkestra, often performing his set on the floor in the middle of the audience. He released his debut EP, Iberian Passage, written and recorded while he was living in Portugal, in the spring of 2014 on Joyful Noise Recordings and his full-length studio album debut, Director, followed in 2015. Within months of Director's premiere, an EP produced by Steve Albini titled Physical Copy followed.Gat's latest album, Universalists, was released through Joyful Noise Records on May 4, 2018. In that same year he went on to release a split 7-inch with Os Mutantes, be featured as guest guitarist on legendary Nigerien band Tal National's new album, and premiere (on cinema outlet NOWNESS) a collaboration with a Rhode Island Algonquin powwow drum ensemble – the Eastern Medicine Singers. The album's release was followed by a world tour featuring an 8-piece band, which included members of his own ensemble of long-time collaborators, as well as the Native American drummers and singers of the Eastern Medicine Singers.


== References ==


== External links ==
Yonatan Gat official web site
Yonatan Gat full discography