Jonathan Sigmund Shalit  (born 17 April 1962) is a British talent manager and chairman of ROAR Global and Cole Kitchenn. He is a regular speaker at Entertainment industry events in the UK and abroad and advises government on the UK's entertainment industry. He is Jewish and a supporter of Israel. He attends the West London Synagogue.


== Career ==
Shalit did not attend university. Before becoming a talent manager he worked as a broker at Lloyd's of London and at then worked at Saatchi & Saatchi. Talent he has managed include Charlotte Church, Mel B, Baroness Brady, Kelly Brook, Cher, Dame Joan Collins, Rebecca Ferguson, Katherine Jenkins, Sir Elton John, Vinnie Jones , Kelly Hoppen, Lorraine Kelly, Myleene Klass, N-Dubz, Arlene Phillips, Sir George Martin, the Beatles' producer, Pixie Lott, Sting, Tulisa, Gregg Wallace, Simon Cowell, and the winners of the ITV television talent show Britain's Got Talent. In 1994, he was instrumental in the making of The Glory of Gershwin, Larry Adler's album of George and Ira Gershwin songs.In 2000 he was sacked as manager by Charlotte Church.  He then subsequently sued her successfully, and he received 2 million pounds plus court costs.  Shallit disagreed with Church's version of events given to the Leveson Inquiry.  He challenged Church's assertion that she ought to perform at Rupert Murdoch's birthday party in exchange for positive media coverage as opposed to a £100,000 fee. Shallit claimed no fee was ever discussed.Charity work includes trusteeships with Variety, the Children's Charity, the Chicken Shed Theatre Company. He is also a supporter of Norwood charity.He has been executive producer in two movies (as of 1 September 2019):Pudsey the Dog: The Movie(2014) (also voiced character "Cyril the Chicken") and The Time of Their Lives (2017).
Shalit has also appeared in numerous TV shows, most notably No Talent Required (2004), Most Shocking Celebrity Moments of the 21st Century (2007), and Most Shocking Talent Show Moments (2011).
He was awarded the OBE in 2014 for services to the entertainment industry and an honorary professorship in 2012 by Henley Business School of Reading University in recognition of his contribution to the arts, music and broadcasting.


== References ==


== External links ==
jonathanshalit.com Retrieved 12 April 2015
Jonathan Shalit at IMDb
Debrett's Retrieved 12 April 2015