James Gordon Lindsay (June 18, 1906 – April 1, 1973) was a revivalist preacher, author, and founder of Christ for the Nations Institute. Born in Zion, Illinois, Lindsay's parents were disciples of John Alexander Dowie, the father of healing revivalism in America. After the family moved to Portland, Oregon, the young boy was influenced by John G. Lake and converted to Pentecostalism by Charles Fox Parham. At the age of eighteen he began his ministry as a traveling evangelist, conducting meetings in Assembly of God, British Israelite churches and other Pentecostal groups. By 1940 he was organizing large convention meetings, including the 1940 Anglo-Saxon World Federation meetings in Vancouver. In 1947 he began serving as campaign manager and publicist for William Branham, with whom he established Voice of Healing magazine in 1948. Lindsay gradually took over full management of the Voice of Healing association which helped launch and popularize the ministries of Oral Roberts, A. A. Allen, an dozens of other prominent evangelists. In 1971, Lindsay renamed the organization Christ For The Nations to reflect the growing missionary focus of the organization. He led the organization until his death.


== Biography ==

James Gordon Lindsay was born and raised in an atmosphere of healing and Pentecostal experience. He was born in Zion City, Illinois, on June 18, 1906. His parents were Thomas Lindsay and Effie (Ramsey) Lindsay. They were followers of John Alexander Dowie, a famous healing evangelist of the late 1800s who claimed to be the return of Elijah the Prophet and founded Zion as a religious commune. When the city went bankrupt, after the fall of Dowie, the Lindsay family moved to a Christian community led by Pisgah Finis E. Yoakum in California, and then to Portland, Oregon. Lindsay converted to Pentecostalism during a meeting led by Charles Fox Parham, an early leader of the Pentecostal movement in Topeka, Kansas. He then developed a relationship with John G. Lake, who had also been a follower of Dowie, and who was leading the Divine Healing Mission in Spokane, Washington and Portland, Oregon. During the 1920s, Lindsay traveled with Lake in mission campaigns in California and the southern states. Then he became a pastor of a Foursquare Gospel church in California before later returning to Oregon, where he married Freda Schimpf.Lindsay was involved with the British Israelite movement and was the organizer of the 1940 Anglo Saxon World Federation Convention held during March in Vancouver, Canada. Speakers at the event included Canadian minister Clem Davies, a KKK recruiter and promoter of an early version of Christian Identity Theology. When World War II broke out, Lindsay accepted a call to become pastor of a church in Ashland, Oregon in early 1940.


== Voice of Healing ==

Lindsay first heard William Branham in a meeting in Sacramento during the authum of 1947 and, after meeting with him, they both agreed that Lindsay should act as Branham's campaign manager.  Later that year he resigned his pastoral position to become campaign manager for Branham. In order to promote the campaign, Lindsay started the "Voice of Healing" in Shreveport Louisiana in April 1948. Shreveport was home of Branham's prior campaign manager Jack Moore, who pastored a church in the city. A magazine of wide circulation, particularly in the southern US, the first issue listed William Branham as Publisher, Gordon Lindsay as Editor, Jack Moore as Associate Editor, and Anna Jeanne Moore as Circulation Editor.A few months later in July 1948, Branham announced he was stepping away from the revival circuit for a time. The news came as quite a blow to Lindsay who had just begun the revival publication to cover Branham's meetings. Coverage of other evangelists, such as Jack Coe, Oral Roberts,  and A. A. Allen began to appear in the magazine as it circulated nationwide. The group sponsored the first convention of healing evangelists in Dallas, Texas during 1949 and began to function as a loose fellowship of ministers under the Voice of Healing banner. In 1950 a biography of Branham written by Lindsay ("William Branham: A Man Sent from God") was published.By October 1950, Branham was no longer the publisher but was listed as an associate editor.  The masthead listed the following editors:

Gordon Lindsay - Editor
Jack Moore - Co-editor
Anna Jeanne Moore - Managing editor
F. F. Bosworth - Associate editor
Wilbur Ogilvie - Associate editor
William Branham - Associate editor
O.L. Jaggers - Associate editor
Harvey McAlister - Associate editor
T. L. Osborn - Associate editor
Dale Hanson - Associate editor
Gayle Jackson - Associate editorAs the popularity of some of its members rose, they left the fellowship to establish their own organizations and publish their own literature. As a result of the popularity of the magazine, and Lindsay's status as a key organizer of revival meetings, Lindsay played a key role in the Healing Revival period.Lindsay's own work began to move in the direction of missions. He began sponsoring missions programs in several foreign countries and started a radio ministry. During 1956 he conducted a Winning the Nations Crusade, sending teams of ministers all around the world. The Voice of Healing magazine changed names briefly to World-Wide Revival in 1958 before reverting to Voice of Healing later the same year. The final name change to Christ for the Nations occurred in 1971. One of Lindsay's last "visions" before his death was a bible training institute in Dallas, Texas.
Lindsay was a prolific writer, publishing over 250 volumes of historical and doctrinal books on the healing revival movement. His ministry came to a halt with his sudden death on April 1, 1973. Lindsay's wife Freda and family continued the work he began. Christ for the Nations, Inc. has five main facets: a national church program; a national literature work; a Jewish mission in Israel national and international Bible training schools; and a prayer and tape ministry.
Gordon Lindsay was also the first Evangelical preacher/writer to assume a link between the UFO phenomenon of his day and the fallen Angels (Nephilim) in Genesis 6. He wrote several books about the subject, as well as articles in the Voice of Healing Magazine.
His daughter Shira is married to Pastor Ari Sorko-Ram, who founded the Maoz Israel ministry in Israel.


== Christ For The Nations Institute ==
His son, Dennis Lindsay, is the current president of CFNI  and continues the work that his parents started.
Dr. John Hollar is the current executive director of CFNI.


== References ==


== Sources ==
Harrell, David (1978). All Things Are Possible: The Healing and Charismatic Revivals in Modern America. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-525-24136-1.


== External links ==
Christ For The Nations Official Website
http://fredalindsay.com/
Current President Dennis Lindsay