Ewa Kupiec (born 2 November 1964) is a classical pianist.


== Biography ==
Ewa Kupiec was born in Duszniki-Zdroj/ Poland, studied in Katowice, the Chopin Academy in Warsaw and at the Royal Academy of Music in London.
She won the ARD Music Competition (category duo piano/cello, 1992).
Since autumn 2011, she is a professor for piano at the Hanover University of Music, Theater and Media.
In July 2018 Ewa has been elected as a member of the European Academy of Science and Arts.
She is giving masterclasses around Europe and has been a member  of the Jury of renowned Competitions like ARD/ Germany, Sydney/Australia, Busoni/Italy, Beethoven/Bonn-Germany, Maj Lind/Finland, PTNA/Japan and Mozart/Zhuhai-China. 

Ewa Kupiec regularly performed at the world’s leading festivals and with major orchestras, which in recent seasons have included Munich Philharmonic, Sao Paulo Symphony Orchestra, Minnesota Orchestra, City of Birmingham Symphony, Royal Stockholm Philharmonic, Royal Danish Orchestra, Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, Warsaw Philharmonic, Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, Yomiuri Nippon Symphony Orchestra, Leipzig Gewandhaus, and Orchestre de Paris. Conductors she worked with include Andrés Orozco-Estrada, Marin Alsop, Neeme Järvi, Ingo Metzmacher, Xian Zhang, Sakari Oramo, Semyon Bychkov, Giancarlo Guerrero, Herbert Blomstedt, Krzysztof Penderecki, Lothar Zagrosek, Gilbert Varga, Christoph Poppen, Andrey Boreyko and Marek Janowski. Renowned Polish maestro Stanislaw Skrowaczewski has initiated and supported an exceptionally fruitful musical collaboration between the two, and as such they have performed all over the world and, released in 2003, recorded Chopin’s piano concerti  together.
Ewa Kupiec is a dedicated interpreter of contemporary music. Her Berlin Konzerthaus performance in 2005 of Schnittke’s First Piano Concerto with the Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra was the first performance of this work since 1964 and was released by Phoenix in 2008, together with other Schnittke works for piano and orchestra. Her recital and chamber music programs often include contemporary works, and different composers have dedicated pieces to her. As a result of this collaboration a CD “Conception” with works of R. Meyers and A. Bibalo was released in 2005. 
2014 saw four special releases: Polish composer’s Andrzej Panufnik’s piano concerto for the complete recording of his œvre, together with the Konzerthausorchester Berlin for cpo (ICMA Special Achievement Award 2015), Grażyna Bacewicz‘ piano quintet arranged for piano and string orchestra for the Naxos label together with the Capella Bydgostiensis  – awarded the prestigious Fryderyk Award in Poland (2015)
Among other numerous recordings are works by Szymanowsky (ECHO Klassik 1997) and Paderewski. For Sony, she recorded Władysław Szpilman’s music, known from the movie „The Pianist“.
2007 Haenssler released her recording of Janacek‘s solo works and 2010 saw the release of Żal, with solo works by Chopin and Schubert. In 2011, in cooperation with Deutschlandfunk, she published a CD with solo works by Kodály and Enescu (Solaris).  2012 saw the release of Chopin’s piano concertos and Nocturnes selection on the Australian ABC label, and 2013 the premiere recording of Lutosławski’s works for piano solo (Sony). in 2014 Chopin’s works for piano and cello with Johannes Moser (Hänssler), and piano quintets by Scharwenka and Dvorak with the Armida Quartet (Solaris).


== References ==


== External links ==
Ewa Kupiec: Discography from All Music
Literature by and about Ewa Kupiec in the German National Library catalogue
Official website