Karl Engemann is an American record industry executive, producer and entertainment industry personal manager. Former Capitol Records Vice-president of Artist & Repertoire (1967–70), personal manager of various combinations of the Osmond Family (1976-2009), currently personal manager for radio and television host and broadcaster Larry King. As in the past, he continues to manage the careers of Shawn King, Gerri Engemann, Paul Engemann, Shannon Engemann, Ryan Engemann and Bret Engemann.
Born Paul Karl Engemann in Detroit, MI on August 3, 1930.  Also known as P. Karl Engemann and Paul K. Engemann.  Raised on the west side suburbs of Detroit, served in the U.S. Army from 1951 - 1953.  Graduated from Brigham Young University in 1958 with a B.S. degree in marketing, elected to Phi Kappa Phi Honor Society.
Played saxophone and piano in big bands and small combos and sang in vocal groups through high school, military service and university years.
March 1958, hired as a Warner Bros. Records producer and A&R man. Produced two of the label's first top ten single records, --- "Kookie, Kookie (Lend Me Your Comb)" with Edd Byrnes, reaching #4 on the Billboard singles charts and “Sixteen Reasons” with Connie Stevens, reaching #3 on Billboard.March 1960, joined Capitol Records as a producer.  In 1962 he became Director of Business Affairs, then promoted to General Manager A&R in 1965, and in 1967 was appointed Vice-President of Artist and Repertoire, 1967 to 1970.  During the ten years he spent at Capitol, he was instrumental in the signing of, among others, The Beach Boys, The Lettermen, Bob Segar, Joe South, The Classics IV, Bobby Gentry, Grand Funk Railroad and Dorsey Burnette.
Exited Capitol Records in 1970, co-venturing an independent MGM South Records label, production and publishing partnership with Bill Lowery out of Atlanta.  Artists released on the MGM South label included Sami Jo, Dennis Yost and The Classics IV, Tommy Roe, and Billy Joe Royal.
He also partnered with his brother Bob Engemann  of The Lettermen fame and his nephew John Hess in the Independent Recorders Studios in Studio City, CA., which was sold in 1977 to record producer Freddie Perren and his wife Christine Perren.
In 1976, began managing the recording careers of Donny Osmond, Marie Osmond, The Osmond Brothers and Jimmy Osmond. In 1979 he was appointed personal manager in various career stages of all the Osmond entities, and finally just Marie Osmond over a 35-year span.
In December 2009, he parted company with Marie over a legal dispute.Since 2010, Engemann has managed the career of radio and television host and broadcaster Larry King and others as stated above.


== References ==