Carla's Dreams is a music project from the Republic of Moldova, formed on January 20, 2012, in Chișinău. The band is composed of an anonymous group of singers and composers who perform their songs in Romanian, English and Russian. Carla's Dreams debuted in 2012 and became known and appreciated after releasing the version with Inna of the single "P.O.H.U.I." from 2013.The band combines several musical genres, the most recognizable of which are hip hop, rock, jazz and pop, and uses personalized slang in songs that evoke realities from everyday life. Carla’s Dreams is a name inspired by the character Karla, from the espionage novels of the British-Irish writer John le Carré.The vocal soloist of the band codenamed "Sergiu" and his bandmates hide their identity in all public appearances and wear hooded sweatshirts, sunglasses and a face mask made entirely of makeup.The project is a phenomenon in social media and enjoys popularity in the music industry in the country of origin and Romania. With nine singles at number one on the Romanian Airplay 100, Carla's Dreams is the most successful music project in the history of the charts.


== Historic ==


=== 2012–2018 ===
The project started its activity in the Republic of Moldova, and on May 4, 2012, it released its first album, Hobson's Choice, distributed for free on the Internet.
In March 2013, Carla's Dreams remade the song "P.O.H.U.I." and made a video with the Romanian singer Inna. The single was successful in Romania and the Republic of Moldova, occupying the first positions in the music charts and garnering over 22 million views on YouTube. In April 2013, the song reached number two in the Romanian Top 100 and Airplay 100 music charts.At the end of 2013, Carla's Dreams released the single "Lumea ta" in collaboration with Loredana, the second song released by the band in Romania. In one of the first television appearances of the band, the single is performed live in an edition of the show Vocea României from Pro TV.In the summer of 2014, Carla’s Dreams collaborates with Dara, another artist from the Republic of Moldova, and with the Romanian singers Inna and Antonia on the song “Fie ce-o fi”.On May 14, 2015, the band released the single "Cum ne noi", a collaboration with Delia. The song is composed by Carla's Dreams, and the producers are Play & Win. "Cum ne noi" occupied first place for seven weeks in the Media Forest chart in Romania. The video for the song was named the most popular video on YouTube in Romania in 2015. With over 34 million views in almost seven months since its release, the video "Cum ne noi" became the first Romanian song to exceed 10 million views within 30 days of launch. The second song signed by Carla’s Dreams and performed by Delia in 2015 was “Da, mamă”. The single debuted two weeks after its release in the top of the Romanian songs of Media Forest Romania on position seven and recorded 10 million views on YouTube in just 19 days.At the beginning of 2016, Carla's Dreams composed and performed the song on the soundtrack of the comedy TV series, Atletico Textila, produced and broadcast by Pro TV. In May 2016, the band released the album NGOC, the first released in Romania and the third in their career, through a sold-out concert organized at the Roman Arenas in Bucharest with over 5,000 spectators. The song "Sub pielea mea" from the album NGOC took 1st place on Russian radios, 7th in the top Shazam Russia and 5th in iTunes Russia. It also ranked first in the top Media Forest in Romania and made a million views on YouTube just a few days after its launch. In the same month, the band launched their online store with Carla's Dreams clothes, albums and other items.Carla's Dreams became the undisputed winners of the 2016 Media Music Awards, with eight awards in the most important categories: “Best Group”, “Best Song”, and “Best Video”.The boys from Carla's Dreams returned to the Russian Federation, and on November 9, 2016, the Yotaspace hall in Moscow was packed at the band's first concert.From 2016 until 2018, the band's lead singer was a member of the jury of X-Factor, a Romanian televised competition that aims to find new vocal musical talents. The contestant Olga Verbițchi, from "Sergiu" 's team, won season 6 of 2016 of the music show broadcast by Antena 1.On May 7, 2017, Carla's Dreams performed a concert in London on the O2 Arena in front of three thousand spectators. On May 13, 2017, the band released the album Antiexemplu through a concert organized at the Roman Arenas.In May 2018, the band held their third concert at the Roman Arenas, Monomaniac, and the band's lead singer became a juror in the show The Four, which premiered in the same spring on Antena 1. Also, in May 2018, Carla's Dreams held three concerts in Canada, and in June 2018, they held two concerts in Germany, in Munich and Cologne.On September 1, 2018, Carla’s Dreams gave a recital on stage at the 18th edition of the Golden Stag Festival in Brașov.In October 2018, the band started the Nocturn project, consisting of a series of videos with links between them, all filmed during the night. 12 songs were released, including "Luna", "Dependent" with Deliric, "Anxietate" with Antonia, along with explanatory testimonials, but also other musical materials. The whole project was directed by Roman Burlacă.


=== 2019–2021 ===

On May 13, 2019, Carla’s Dreams held their first concert at the Romexpo exhibition center in Bucharest, with over 8,500 spectators. The first special guest of the Nocturn concert was Antonia, with whom the boys from the band sang the singles "Te rog" and "Anxietate". Carla’s Dreams sang “Inima” and “Cum ne noi” with Delia, and the song “Ne bucurăm în ciuda lor” was reinterpreted in a unique version with a symphony orchestra. "P.O.H.U.I.", "Născut în Moldova", "Până la sânge", "Imperfect" or "Sub pielea mea" were also present in the concert setlist.
In 2019, the band's vocal soloist borrowed the voice of the character Nassor from the Romanian dubbing of the animated film Frankenweenie, produced by Walt Disney Pictures in 2012.Carla’s Dreams single “Secrete” peaked at No. 1 on the Media Forest chart in the summer of 2020, with over 15 million views on YouTube. Also, the song "Seară de Seară" was the most listened to Romanian song of 2020, with over 26 million views on YouTube.In the summer of 2021, Carla's Dreams returns and launches its first project with Emaa. The single "N-aud" quickly entered the music charts in Romania and the Republic of Moldova. Also, the song's video, directed by Roman Burlacă, recorded 3.6 million views on YouTube in less than a month.The song "Simplu și ușor" won the award for best song of the year at The Artist Awards 2021, which took place in September 2021 in Craiova.In September 2021, the band's lead singer became a juror in the music show on Pro TV, SuperStar Romania. He also had a surprise appearance on the show Masked Singer Romania, where he competed as an Emoji.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


== Awards and nominations ==


== Songwriting ==


== References ==


== External links ==

CarlasDreams.ro - Official website
Carla's Dreams Channel on YouTube
Carla's Dreams on Apple Music
Carla's Dreams on Spotify
Carla's Dreams discography at Discogs