Ali Ahmadifar (Persian: علی احمدی‌فر, born 12 July 1976) is an Iranian composer, teacher and researcher.


== Book ==
Author of the book "Stylistics of Arvo Pärt music (Persian:سبک شناسی موسیقی آروو پارت)", published 2007.


== Works ==
"Where are you, o thou fairy?"(An Iranian variation) was performed by MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra in 2006.
one of his works was performed by valid flute soloist Reza Najfar in 2008, Rasht.
"Minimove" (An Iranian variation for flute and strings) was performed by Camerata symphony orchestra led by Keyvan Mirhadi in 2008, Rasht.
"Bâng – e Robâb" was performed by the Avram ensemble in 2011.
Radio contemporary music program editor and writer in Iranian radio broadcast network culture, 1999-2000.
The founder and first conductor of Gilan sinfonietta orchestra and choir, performing concert at Vahdat Hall, September 2007.


== Lectures ==
Concepts and specification of Music
International Customary instruments and symphony orchestra
Composition
Orchestration
Variation
Canon and Fugue
Sonata
Form
Symphony from the beginning until today
Opera from the beginning until today
Concerto from the beginning until today
Chamber music from the beginning until today
The impact of Liturgical music in the classical music
Modernism in music
Postmodernism in Music
Minimalism, Post Minimalism and After 
Aleatory Music
Musical Terms 
Nonserial Atonality Music 
Neo Romanticism 
Classical Serialism and Total Serialism 
Analysis of Bach's Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue 
Steve Reich
Philip Glass
Arvo Pärt
Contemporary music
Iranian composers
Pathology of Iranian today music
Dynamics and Rest
Pluralism in post-tonal music
Modern and contemporary harmony
Stylistics and history of contemporary music
The Development of rhythm
The end of historic music and new history of music
Authoring and translating professional articles about the contemporary music of world and Iran
Head of Gilan music community organization, 2007-2011 
lecturer of University of Applied Sciences & Technology (UAST), Art and Culture Gillan branch, years 2009-2010.
lecturer of music Faculty, Gilan University, 2011-2012.
Jury member of Eleventh music festival of Khuzestan, Ahvaz February 2012.
Teaching composition, stylistics and history of music in Tehran, Rasht and Ahvaz


== References ==