Radha Mangeshkar (born 29 July 1981) is a singer from Mumbai, India. She is an expert in Hindustani Classical Music from which she has derived her own style and flavor to create a legacy of her own. She sings in Bhavsargam a musical program which is in fact a musical journey of some famous Indian cinematic and theatrical songs in Marathi and Hindi. Apart from her shows in all the major cities in India, Radha has performed in many different countries like United States, United Arab Emirates, Muscat, United Kingdom, Australia, Hong Kong, Kuwait and Singapore.


== Early life and career highlights ==
Radha is born into the ‘Mangeshkar’ family that has given some of the best musical gems to the musical world. Her father Hridaynath Mangeshkar and her aunts Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhosale, Usha Mangeshkar and Meena Khadikar need no separate introduction.
Radha's musical journey started at a young age of 7 with her father as her ‘guru’ and she has been performing on stage in Bhavsargam along with her father from the age of 9 years. Apart from Bhavsargam, Radha has performed in numerous other shows like ‘Shivkalyan Raja’, ‘Nakshatran che dene’, ‘Akshay Gane Abhanga Gane’, Dil ki Nazar se’, ‘Didi ani Mi’. During the course of this musical journey, Radha has performed alongside many other eminent artists like Hrishikesh Ranade, Jeetendra Abhyankar, Vibhavari Apte, Suvarna Mategaokar and Rajesh Datar.
Radha has recently started her own solo performance shows:

‘Kahe Meera Soor Kabira’... based on north Indian saints Meera, Surdas and Kabir. These songs are performed in Marathi and Hindi
‘Rabindra Sangeet’... based on compositions of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore. The Songs are performed in Bengali languageRadha has recently released her solo music album titles ‘Naav maze Shami’ with music composed by Hridaynath Mangeshkar and launched by Lata Mangeshkar.


== Academic education ==
Radha is a Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Hindi and BA in Philosophy. Later she did Master of Arts (MA) in Philosophy. Currently she is doing her PhD.


== Footnotes ==


== External links ==
Youtube.com
Menon, Lekha (1 June 2009). "The Gen Y Mangeshkar". The Times of India. Retrieved 18 November 2018.
Bhanage, Mihir (16 January 2017). "Carrying the Mangeshkar legacy forward". The Times of India. Retrieved 18 November 2018.
Movies.rediff.com
Indian Express article