Luca Aquino (born June 1, 1974) is an Italian jazz trumpeter and flugelhornist.


== Life and career ==
Born in the town of Benevento, in southern Italy, he was mainly self-taught when he began to play the trumpet at the age of nineteen. For two years he abandoned the practice of the instrument to pursue a master's degree in economics. His love for the sound of Miles Davis and Chet Baker brought him back to the study of trumpet.
In 2007 Universal Music released Sopra Le Nuvole, his first album as leader. A year later he recorded Lunaria with guests Roy Hargrove and Maria Pia De Vito. The album won the Top Jazz award by the Italian magazine Musica Jazz. In 2009, he recorded Amam, then TSC in a church in the Netherlands. In 2010, he recorded Icaro Solo for solo trumpet and electronics in a church in Benevento. After creating the festival Riverberi, a collaboration with Mimmo Paladino led to Chiaro an album in trio with a Norwegian rhythm section and special guest Lucio Dalla. In 2012, after a live album with American trumpeter Jon Hassell for the Church of Saint Augustine in Benevento, he joined the quartet of the percussionist Manu Katché and recorded two albums. In 2013 with the accordionist Carmine Ioanna he recorded aQustico for Tuk Music and embarked on a world tour. In 2015 OverDOORS was a tribute to his favorite rock band, The Doors. In December 2015 he worked with the Jordanian National Association Orchestra on an album in the archaeological site of Petra. The album was made possible by the support of UNESCO Amman Office, the Petra Development and Tourism Authority, and the Talal Abu-Ghazaleh Organization (TAG-Org). An initiative promoted within the framework of the global campaign #UNITE4HERITAGE, started by UNESCO in defense of the artistic and cultural heritage.After directing the Pozzuoli Jazz Festival and the Bari Jazz on April 7, 2016 he participated in Manu & Friends, sharing the stage of the Olympia in Paris with Sting, Richard Bona, Noa, Stephan Eicher, Raul Midon, and Tore Brunborg. In 2017 a signature trumpet model "Aquino" was handcrafted by the Dutch artisan Hub Van Laar. In 2017 Aquino developed Bell's palsy, an injury to the seventh nerve in his face, forcing him to cancel the Jazz Bike Tour which included fifty concerts to be traveled by bike from Benevento to Oslo.


== Style ==
He was influenced by the early playing of Chet Baker and Miles Davis, for which he was given the nickname  "Apostle of Miles", and by the rock bands The Doors and AC/DC. He is known for  research on natural sound, the use of electronics, and his passion for musical experimentation in unusual places.


== Discography ==


=== As leader ===
Sopra Le Nuvole (Emarcy, 2008)
Lunaria (Universal Classics & Jazz, 2009)
 "Icaro Solo" - Universal Music 2010
Chiaro (Tuk, 2011)
aQustico Tuk/Bonsai, 2013)
Did You Hear Something? (Leo, 2013)
Live in Concert (ACT, 2014)
Rock 4.0 (Musica Jazz, 2014)
OverDOORS (Tuk, 2015)
Petra (TAGI, 2016)
Aqustico Vol 2 (Losen, 2017)
Italian Songbook (ACT, 2019)


=== AS SIDEMAN & COOLEADER ===
2020
w ED quartet
w Sade Mangiaracina & Salvatore Maltana
w Mauro Sigura 4et
2016
Vesevus w Solis String & Gianluca Brugnano - Egea
Manu Katchè - Unstatic - Anteprima Production
Sade Mangiaracina – “La terra dei Ciclopi” - Innerc Circle Music
Autor de Chet - Verve
Paolo Freu - Around Tuk - Espresso
Rita Marcotulli - A Pino - Espresso
Francesco Mascio “Ganga’s Spirit” - Emme Produzioni
2015
Planet E - Parco della Musica
Fortitho - 12 Lune
Matthieu Borè - Naked Songs - Bonsai Music
2014
Manu Katché Live in Concert  - Act Music
My Summer Jazz - Bonsai Music
Carmine Ioanna Solo - Bonsai Music
Sardegna Chi_Ama
Niccoló Faraci It Came To Broadcast The Yucatan - Auand
Nina Pedersen Sweet Mornig
Piero Delle Monache Thunupa - Auand
2013
Lucio Dalla Dalla in jazz - Sony Music
Lucio Dalla Qui dove il mare luccica - Sony Music
Joe Barbieri Chet Lives - Le Chant Du Monde
Stefano Costanzo Tricatiempo - Auand
Chaos Conspiracy Who The Fuck Is Elvis?- Overdub Recordings
Swedish Mobilia Did you hear something - Leo Records
Mas en Tango Alma - Picanto Records
Il Pentagramma della Memoria
2012
Giovanni Francesca “Genesi” - Auand
Jano Quartet “Distante” - Via Veneto Jazz
Gianni De Nitto “Remixin Standard” - Universal
Lucio Dalla - Qui dove il mare luccica - Sony Music
“The Italian Jazz Job” - Universal Music
“Giovani in tour” - Musiclive/Ismez
La Costituente “Per quanto vi prego” - Altipiani
Mariella Nava “Come un amore” - Edel
2011
Omparty “Petra Janca” - Label Picanto Records
Cherillo meets Aquino “Soffice” Picanto
Marco Bardoscia “The dreamer” My Favorite Records
“The Skopje connection meets Ernst Reijseger” - Losen Record
2010
Pieluigi Villani “Tempus Transit” Universal Music
The Skopje Connection “Amam” - Egea
Remo Anzovino “Igloo” Egea 2010
Chaos Conspiracy - Warner Chappel
Rita pacilio “Se io fossi luna “Splash Record
Aquino “Live Proposals”
Chaos Conspiracy “Indie Rock Makes ME Sick” - Mondadori
2009
Ghemon “Beleave” Digital Record
Marco Zurzolo “Migranti” - Egea
Gentile Giovanni - Mike day 2
Omeparty e Leon Pantarey “L’isola della pomice” - Picanto Records
Marzo Zurdolo "Migranti" - Egea
Fabrizio Savino feat. Luca Aquino “Metropolitan Prints” Alfamusic
2008
Omeparty “L’isola della pomice” - Picanto Record
Rosso Rubino “Tecniche di approccio” - Altipiani
2007
Giuseppe Del Re “Sings Cole Porter” - Abeat Record
2006
Leo Quartieri “Bambimbi Viaggi nel mondo” Leo Rec
2005
Live in BN with Chuck Findley – Riverberi
2004
Eight caught planning - Time in Jazz Record
Wide 5et “Meet me in Sardinja” - Splash Music


== External links ==
Luca Aquino discography at Discogs 


== References ==