Richard Jason "R.J." Helton (born May 17, 1981; as Rolando Alberto de Jesus Rivas, Jr.) is an American Christian musician, who sings Christian pop music. He has released a studio album, Real Life, with GospoCentric Records. This album was his breakthrough release upon the Billboard magazine charts.


== Early life and background ==
Helton was born in Pasadena, Texas, on May 17, 1981, as Rolando Alberto de Jesus Rivas, Jr., to a Nicaraguan father. Shortly after his birth, he was adopted and renamed Richard Jason Helton. At the time of Helton's American Idol appearance, his adoptive parents, Glen and Sue Helton, worked respectively as a vice president of Popeyes Chicken and as an administrative assistant for an architecture firm. From the age of three, Helton impressed his parents with vocal imitations of various music artists. Helton sang in church growing up and started performing in talent shows at age five. At the time, he still lived in Pasadena, but his father's job caused the family to move frequently. Helton lived in Winston-Salem, North Carolina when he was in middle school. He transferred schools about a dozen times before ninth grade, when midway through the school year, his family established long-term residency in the Atlanta area. Helton attended Tuscola High School, where he participated in the choir.Before auditioning for the first season of American Idol, he briefly performed Christian music in a Nashville-based group and worked as a dance teacher at the YMCA in Alpharetta.


== American Idol ==
Helton auditioned for season one of American Idol in Atlanta. He was the first person to audition in the city. Although he was not voted through to the Top 10 during the Top 30 semi-finals, he was chosen by the judges as the season's only Wild Card finalist. While participating in a photo shoot during the first week of the finals, he fell off a stage and required medical treatment. Helton's performances throughout the Top 10 finals received mixed reactions from the judges, and Helton was voted out of the competition in fifth place. A week after he left the competition, Q100 radio hosted a homecoming party for Helton at the Mall of Georgia.During the competition, Rodney Ho of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution wrote that Helton "exudes an enduring innocence". He further called Helton a "sweet teenybopper favorite" who had "shown surprising strength in the competition" and praised Helton's performance of the Stevie Wonder song "Superstition", but Ho also considered Helton less attention-grabbing than some of the other American Idol season one finalists. While Kevin D. Thompson of The Palm Beach Post expressed admiration for Helton's ability to rise above Simon Cowell's criticism, a few weeks into the finals, he concurred with Ho that Helton was likely to be overshadowed by more skillful competitors. By the Top 6 round, Zap2It called Helton one of the "longshots" to win the competition. Richard L. Eldredge of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution considered Helton's elimination from the series a "surprise", noting that Helton's performance during Top 5 week had been well-received. Ho disagreed, expressing the view that Helton was an underdog who had "lasted longer than many expected". Upon Helton's elimination, Jessica Shaw of Entertainment Weekly wrote, "I'm sure there are a few prayer-loving teens who are weeping their eyes out, but the rest of us know what Simon knew all along: This guy was barely good enough to be a boy-band understudy."


=== Performances ===


== Music career ==
Helton returned to American Idol shortly after his fifth place finish on the series to perform a group medley during the season one finale. Through October and November 2002, he joined his fellow finalists from that season of the series as a performer on the American Idols Live! Tour. During the tour, he reprised his performance of the Stevie Wonder song "Lately", which he had performed on American Idol during the Wild Card round. Helton also recorded "Lately" for the compilation album, American Idol: Greatest Moments, which charted at #4 on the Billboard 200. Shortly before the 2002 American Idol tour, The St. Petersburg Times reported that Helton was "talking to record labels" and pursuing a career in Christian music.On November 28, 2002, Helton performed during the lighting of Macy's Great Tree at the Rich's department store in Atlanta's Lenox Square. Also performing at the event were Charlotte Church, Usher, Jaci Velasquez, Francine Reed, the Georgia Mass Choir, and B5. By the end of 2002, Helton had established a deal to appear alongside other American Idol finalists in commercials for Old Navy.Helton released the studio album Real Life on March 23, 2004 through the GospoCentric Records imprint B-Rite Music. The album had initially been scheduled for release on March 9 of that year. This album was his breakthrough release upon the Billboard magazine charts, while it placed on the Christian Albums and Heatseekers Albums charts, where it peaked at Nos. 14 and 19, correspondingly.In 2009, Helton performed in "Idolized", a Las Vegas-based group concert, featuring, in addition to Helton, American Idol finalists Nikki McKibbin, Mikalah Gordon, and Jasmine Trias.


== Personal life ==
He said on a radio show that he was gay, in 2006.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Compilation appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
AllMusic profile
Official website (Archived: 2004 – 2005)
Official website (Archived: 2007 – 2013)