Pravesh Mallick (Nepali: प्रवेश मल्लिक), born on 1 July 1980, is a Bollywood composer, songwriter and playback singer of Nepali origin. After working as a stage performer and composing for non-film albums and songs he debuted as a film playback singer and composer in Prakash Jha's 2016 Hindi film Jai Gangaajal. Maya Thagni is an uplifting and motivational track that features Priyanka Chopra is seen bashing goons who harass innocent villagers and break the law and is beautifully sung by Pravesh Mallick. Mallick, a follower of Padma Shri Pandit Madhup Mudgal, is a lead singer and founder of Sufi rock fusion band ‘Sanidhya’. He has been working as a composer-singer and music teacher for the last 12 years.Pravesh has also performed live in different parts of India and abroad, UK/US/Belgium.


== Early life and education ==
Pravesh was born in Janakpur, Nepal, into a Maithil family. 
Pravesh learned his first note of music from his mother Sushila Mallick through Maithili Lullabies. Pravesh began his early musical training under Pandit Laxmi Narayan Das, Pandit Shiv Lal, Pandit Ram Bihar with MINAP (Mithila Natya Kala Parishad) a cultural institution of Mithila situated. Pravesh moved to New Delhi with his brother Ramesh Mallick for higher training in Hindustani classical music and obtained admission into the prestigious Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi.  Here he learned classical vocal music under teachers such as I.S. Bawra, Sujit Ojha, Sudhanshu Bahuguna. Finally, he was noticed by pandit Madhup Mudgal and had the opportunity to learn different aspects of music under his guidance and also started to perform with the Gandharva Choir in India and abroad.
Pravesh is Sangeet Shiromani Diploma holder and has a master's degree in Hindustani classical music from Delhi University and BscIT from SMU in Delhi. Mallick is married to Amrita Karn Mallick and has one child, Parth Mallick.


== Music career ==
Pravesh started teaching music in Step by Step World School, Noida. He formed a choral music group Sparsh and performed in various parts of India. Later, his interest in music by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, A. R. Rahman and others led him to form a band named Sanidhya.  It performs Sufi, folk, Classical fusion with his own composition. Pravesh also continues with his recording interest by releasing cassettes in different languages like Maithili, Nepali, Hindi, Punjabi and composing music for regional movies and theater productions. Some of his popular albums in Maithili are Geet Ghar Ghar Ke, Chaura Tora Bazzar Khastau, Lehuaayal Aanchar, Khota Shingaar.
He got his first major break in Prakash Jha's film Jai Gangaajal on which he worked with Salim–Sulaiman and sung a Maya Thagni song in his rustic and raw vocals.


== Discography ==


=== Films ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Sanidhya Band official Website
New version of Vandey Matram by Pravesh Mallick
Maya Thagni from Jai Gangaajal
Jogiya, a sufi song
Pravesh Mallick on Twitter