Philippe  Gaubert (5 July 1879 – 8 July 1941) was a French musician who was a distinguished performer on the flute, a respected conductor, and a composer, primarily for the flute.


== Biography ==
Gaubert – commonly referred to as Gauberto – was born in Cahors. He became one of the most prominent French musicians between the two World Wars. After a prominent career as a flautist with the Paris Opéra, he was appointed in 1919, at the age of forty, to three positions that placed him at the very centre of French musical life: 

Professor of flute in the Conservatoire de Paris (teacher of Marcel Moyse)
Principal conductor of the Paris Opéra
Principal conductor of the Orchestre de la Société des Concerts du ConservatoireIn 1907, he participated in the first performance of Maurice Ravel's Introduction and Allegro for harp, flute, clarinet and string quartet. Among his recordings as conductor, one that he made of César Franck's Symphony in D minor (with the Conservatoire forces) is particularly notable.
Gaubert's compositions are not especially innovative, but his work benefited from the examples of Franck, Ravel, and Debussy. Naïla, his opera in three acts, premiered at the Palais Garnier on 7 April 1927. Three of his ballets had their first performances at that venue as well.
In 1941, Gaubert died of a stroke in Paris.


== Legacy ==
Journalist Jean Bouzerand, Gaubert's friend, convinced the town of Cahors to create a public garden in Gaubert's honour near the river Lot in the late 1930s.
When Gaubert was still alive, Albert Roussel dedicated the movement "Monsieur de la Péjaudie" in his piece Joueurs de flûte, op. 27 for flute and piano to him.


== Honours ==
Gaubert was appointed Chevalier de la Legion d'honneur in 1921.


== Selected works ==
Chamber music3 Aquarelles, for flute, cello and piano
Ballade, for flute and piano
Ballade for viola and piano (1938)
Berceuse, for flute and piano
Cantabile et scherzetto, for cornet and piano (1909)
Divertissement Grec, for 2 flutes and harp
2 Esquisses, for flute and piano
Fantaisie, for clarinet & piano
Fantaisie, for flute and piano
Gavotte en rondeau (after Lully's Les Ballets du roi), for flute and piano
Madrigal, for flute and piano
Morceau symphonique, for trombone and piano
Médailles antiques, for flute, violin and piano
Nocturne et allegro scherzando, for flute and piano
Pièce romantique, for flute, cello, and piano
Romance, for flute and piano (1905)
Romance, for flute and piano (1908)
Sicilienne, for flute and piano
Sonata for Flute and Piano, No. 1
Sonata for Flute and Piano, No. 2
Sonata for Flute and Piano, No. 3
Sonatine, for flute and piano
Suite, for flute and piano
Sur l'eau, for flute and piano
Tarantelle, for flute, oboe and pianoVocalSoir paien, for voice, flute and piano
Vocalise en forme de barcarolle, for voice and piano


== Media ==


== External links ==
Brief biographical sketch of Philippe Gaubert on the Naxos Records site
Société des concerts du Conservatoire
Free scores by Philippe Gaubert at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)
Phillip Gaubert - Classical Archives