Eric Wong, born in New York, New York, is the President & CMO of Recorded Music for Warner Music Group.


== Career ==


=== 1997–Present ===
Wong grew up obsessed with music and at age 16, went from devotedly studying the Billboard  Charts each week to an internship while still in high school. A summer internship position at WEA Distribution led to yet another internship at Atlantic Records. While attending New York University, Wong became a college rep for EMI Records. In 1997, while still at school, he was hired at V2 Records, where he was eventually promoted to product manager, overseeing artists such as Moby, Underworld, and Stereophonics.In 1999, Wong joined the Island Def Jam Music Group. As Vice President of Marketing, Wong developed campaigns for a diverse group of acts which included Bon Jovi, Fall Out Boy, Rihanna, Slayer, Sum 41, and Christina Milian.
In 2006, he went to work for Bad Boy Entertainment and Atlantic Records, serving simultaneously as Chief Marketing Officer of Bad Boy and Senior Vice President of Marketing at Atlantic. In this dual role, he was able to get more deeply involved in hip-hop—and study the branding and product extensions pioneered by Bad Boy's Sean “Diddy” Combs—while keeping a hand in the rock and pop he also loved.
Wong points to the opportunity to work on Jay-Z’s landmark 2009 album The Blueprint 3 as a defining moment in his career, working alongside one of the greatest marketers and one of the greatest artists in hip-hop history.
Seeking additional challenges, in 2009, he founded Wong Management, where he worked closely with Mariah Carey.
In 2011, he returned to the Island Def Jam Music Group as Executive Vice President of Marketing, executing creative marketing strategies for artists including Kanye West, Rihanna, Avicii, The-Dream, Fall Out Boy, The Killers, Toni Braxton, and Babyface. His responsibilities expanded to oversee the label group's marketing, digital, creative, artist development, video promotion, and video production departments.In 2014, Wong assumed the role of Executive Vice President / General Manager of Island Records where he led the day-to-day operations of the company.
In 2018, Wong was named the Chief Operating Officer (COO) of Island Records, overseeing operations for the entire label. He oversaw label operations and strategy for Island's entire roster which include artists such as Shawn Mendes, Demi Lovato, Nick Jonas, Fall Out Boy, Tove Lo, The Killers, Bishop Briggs, Jessie Reyez, Elton John, and Mike Posner.
In 2020, Wong became President & Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) of Recorded Music for Warner Music Group, which is home to artists including Ed Sheeran, Cardi B, Coldplay, Dua Lipa, Bruno Mars, Roddy Ricch, and more. Wong serves as the head of worldwide marketing, expanding careers for global artists and working closely with the company's labels as well as overseeing Warner's international A&R function to achieve close collaboration across Warner's network of local repertoire centers.
Wong, a voting member of NARAS, holds an MBA in Marketing, is a certified life coach, and resides in New York City.


== Philanthropy ==
Wong, a previous board of directors member for the Asian American Arts Alliance, was honored by the foundation in 2007. The organization is dedicated to strengthening Asian American artists and cultural groups through resource sharing, promotion, and community building.


== Honors and distinctions ==
Wong's features include Billboard Magazine's International Power Player List in 2021, Billboard Power 100 list in 2019 2020, 2021 and 2022. Gold House's A100 List of Most Impactful Asians in 2020 & 2021, Billboard's Branding Power Players List in 2017, 2018, and 2019, Variety's New Power of New York List in 2018, Billboard Forty Under Forty Power Players List in 2012 and 2015, amongst others.


== References ==