Andrew Huang (born April 8, 1984) is a Canadian musician, music producer, singer-songwriter, rapper, multiinstrumentalist, video producer, and YouTube personality. He is best known for his "Song Challenge" video series, which invites viewers to dare him in feats of musicianship, as well as for several viral videos featuring his music. He is also known for his videos where he creates music using sounds from unconventional objects and instruments. Huang has released more than 50 albums of original music through DFTBA Records and independently, under his own name as well as under various pseudonyms.As of March 2020, his YouTube videos have more than 250 million views with more than 2 million subscribers.


== Personal life ==
Huang was born and raised in Ottawa, Ontario. He obtained a Bachelor of Fine Arts at York University studying music before becoming self-employed as a music producer and YouTube personality. In his early thirties Huang started to develop hearing loss, and due to this he frequently collaborates with other producers to perfect his mixes. He lives in Toronto with his wife Esther and their daughter Evelyn. Huang uses all pronouns, and is gender non-conforming.


== Early career ==
After little success finding a part-time job during his university studies, Huang began auctioning off his songwriting skills to the highest bidder on eBay. The winning bidders received a custom song in any genre, written and recorded to their specifications.In response to the success of the eBay auctions, in April 2004, Huang launched the website Songs To Wear Pants To, where visitors to the site could commission songs based on personal requests. The popularity of the site grew as Huang also began to take on commissions for free, provided the song idea interested him. The free songs often took on a comedic angle, either by poking fun at the person who requested the song, or simply because Huang would choose the most outrageous of submitted ideas to write about. What resulted was an eclectic archive of hip hop, classical, doo wop, electronic, folk, rock and heavy metal tunes performed entirely by Huang.


== YouTube channel ==
In October 2006, Huang started a channel on YouTube and began uploading fan-made music videos for the songs he created through Songs To Wear Pants To. Huang's channel is known for a wide variety of musical genres, influences, and projects, often thematically focused. Huang's videos often feature the artist himself, and frequently aim to showcase various elements of the song.
Huang is known for his "Song Challenge" series, an extension of the idea behind Songs To Wear Pants To, in which Huang takes on musical challenges submitted by viewers via social media. In 2013, he released a rap song titled Vass Tunga, written in five different languages.Huang occasionally uses unusual instruments to record cover versions of songs. One of his early efforts was released a week before AMC's Breaking Bad aired its series finale, featuring a cover of its unsettling title music using clandestine chemistry equipment. Other examples include a cover version of "99 Red Balloons" recorded with balloons, and a cover of The Weeknd's "Can't Feel My Face", using dental instruments filmed in his dentist's office.In 2016, Huang signed to the YouTube network Fullscreen.On March 18, 2021, Huang released a video titled "Final song before I leave" in which he ostensibly claimed that he is leaving Earth to go to space. The video used footage from real rocket launches including the Antares and other doctored images and videos, and was speculated by Newsweek to be promotional for an upcoming music project.


== Collaborations ==

Huang has collaborated with various other YouTube personalities, most notably with Boyinaband and Hannah Hart. He provided instrumentation and songwriting for Hank Green and the Perfect Strangers' Incongruent, and toured across the United States with the band. Huang produced the music for Rhett and Link's "Geeks vs. Nerds" music video in 2013.In 2010, Huang teamed up with musician and internet personality Gunnarolla to produce videos and music, including the popular series We Are What You Tweet and New State Plates. The pair have toured North America, Australia, and New Zealand together. Huang and Gunnarolla later created electropop music duo Dreamz. As a duo, they entered CBC Music's Searchlight contest under this new name, and their debut single "Come On" was selected as CBC Here and Now's Song of the Week on March 11, 2013. Dreamz reached the Top 16 of the contest representing Toronto.In 2008, Huang entered a contest run by American Express and won a chance to develop a music project with Emily Haines, lead vocalist for Canadian indie band Metric. He created an interactive installation featuring a series of videos that visitors could use to create ambient music. The piece was exhibited at the Four Seasons Centre in Toronto during November 2011.Huang composed the anthem for WWF-Canada's official Earth Hour in 2012 using lyrics from user-submitted suggestions, taking the title of "Canada's first official crowd sourced song". Huang later performed the song live during Toronto's 2012 and 2013 Earth Day celebrations.In 2016, Huang partnered with music education platform Soundfly on a course about making music with found sounds. In the course, he creates a full track using just sounds made with a kitchen pot.In late 2018, Huang formed a duo with Rob Scallon called First of October, where Huang and Scallon record an entire 10-track album in 1 recording session. The group has made 3 albums, Ten Hours, Gourmet Ravioli, and Gotta Record Everything Good, all written and recorded in a day each.
In June 2019, Andrew began a new project with YouTuber and science educator Hank Green, Journey to the Microcosmos, a YouTube channel uploading short videos of microscope slides accompanied by voiceovers explaining different mechanisms of microscopic biological life. Huang produces all of the ambient tracks for the show's background music.


== Discography ==
Studio albums
Extended plays
Singles
Collaborations"Ma Bicyclette" (2012) - Andrew Huang & Side Pony Nation
Incongruent (2014) - Hank Green and the Perfect Strangers
Last Lights (2015) - Andrew Huang & Diveo
Hybrid (2015) - Andrew Huang & Brent Petrie
Friends (2016) - Andrew Huang & Friends
"Coffee" (2017) - Andrew Huang & Cuckoo
"Find Me" (2017) - Andrew Huang & Peter Hollens
"Tines" (2017) - Andrew Huang & Rob Scallon
"You Make Winter Warm" (2017) - Andrew Huang & Dusty Lima
Foreign Bodies Redux (2018) - Jeremy Blake, Cuckoo, Rachel K Collier, Andrew Huang
Running Redux (2018) - MALINDA, JVNA, Mr. Bill, Dyalla, Andrew Huang
Ten Hours (2018) - First of October
Practice Notes 35 Redux (2019) -  Sarah the Illstrumentalist, Bad Snacks, Virtual Riot, Andrew Huang
Gourmet Ravioli (2019) - First of October
"Droppy" (2019) - Mr. Bill & Andrew Huang
"Bass Horns" (2020) - Andrew Huang & Moon Hooch
"Top Secret" (2020) - Andrew Huang & TWRP
"Sparkle Mountain (WangleLine Remix)" (2020) - Andrew Huang & WangleLine
Gotta Record Everything Good (2021) - First of October


== References ==


== External links ==
andrewhuang.com