Park Jae-hyung (Korean: 박제형; born September 15, 1992), better known as Jae (Korean: 제이), is an American musician, singer, songwriter, and composer of Korean descent, best known as a former vocalist and lead guitarist of South Korean rock band Day6. Prior to joining Day6, he gained attention in South Korea as one of the final six contestants in the first season of the singing competition television series K-pop Star. In 2020, Park began releasing solo music under the name eaJ.


== Early life ==
Jae Park was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina and moved to Cerritos, California in early childhood. He graduated from Cerritos High School and later studied political science at California State University, Long Beach. Throughout high school and university, he ran a YouTube channel, "YellowPostItMan", where he uploaded vocal-and-guitar song covers as a hobby.In 2012, Park took a leave from university to compete as a singer-guitarist in the inaugural season of K-pop Star. Though he was eliminated from the competition in sixth place, JYP Entertainment (JYPE) offered Park a contract at the end of the show to join the company as a trainee for an upcoming band. Park accepted the offer and moved to South Korea.


== Career ==

Park debuted on September 7, 2015, as a vocalist and electric guitarist of JYP's first rock band, Day6. The band debuted with EP The Day. In March 2016, the band released its second EP, Daydream, for which Park participated in the making of two tracks: "Blood" and "First Time". Park continues to actively participate in the making of numerous tracks following their Daydream album.On June 28, 2016, he became an MC of Arirang's After School Club, alongside Park Ji-min and Kevin Woo, formerly of U-KISS. He officially graduated as ASC's MC on July 17, 2018.In September 2017, Park started a Youtube channel called JaeSix (later renamed eaJ). He began a personal music project on the channel in 2020, releasing self-written solo tracks under the name eaJ.Park was a guest DJ every Monday on Arirang Radio's Monday Music Access with singer Bernard Park. His last appearance as a guest DJ was on April 30, 2018.On February 5, 2020, Park started his first podcast "How Did I Get Here?" (HDIGH) with Dive Studios. AleXa officially joined as his new co-host on August 7, 2020. With episodes releasing every Tuesday, it quickly gained a sizeable audience. HDIGH Podcast won "People's Choice" and "Entertainment" Category by Podcast Award in 2020 and Best Podcast 2020 by Apple Podcast. On May 26, 2021, The Dive Studios officially announced that they will release the final episode of HDIGH on June 1, 2021.On September 21, 2020, Park, alongside 2PM's Nichkhun, took on roles as members of crime-fighting boyband "4 2 Sing" in season three of Big Hero 6: The Series. Park played twins Kwang-Sun and Ye Joon, one half of the boy band "4 2 Sing".On November 27, 2020, DPR Live collaborated with Crush and Park for “Jam & Butterfly”.On September 16, 2020, Park announced his first collab with Seori for "It just is" which also featured Keshi on Guitar. On 22 August 2021 they returned with their latest collaboration "Dive with You"  both of their song featured visual artist Deisa.
On December 2020, Park and Keshi released a single on Youtube, "Pillow".Park performed at Head in the Clouds Festival 2021 on November 6–7, 2021 at the Brookside at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California.On December 31, 2021, Park announced via Twitter that he will be taking a hiatus from his promotions as a member of the band. The same day, JYPE announced that he will be leaving the band and ending his exclusive contract with JYP Entertainment due to personal reasons.


== Personal life ==
On May 10, 2020, JYP Entertainment announced that Day6 would be taking a hiatus due to the mental health concerns of some members. In an interview with Allure, Park revealed that he had a panic attack and was diagnosed with panic disorder in April 2020. Almost a week after JYP's official announcement, Park shared on his personal Twitter account an update on his condition and began sharing his experiences with mental health.On September 15, 2020, Park initiated From Friends, a project partnered with Represent, selling clothing and other merchandise. The campaign raised $100,000 which was donated to the Jed Foundation, which helps provide free mental health resources to teenagers and young adults.


== Controversies ==
During 2020 and early 2021, Park had a Twitch channel, where he regularly streamed himself and friends playing video games, such as Among Us, Animal Crossing, Crossy Road, Roblox, and Valorant. After controversy emerged following a comment made during a stream of the game Rust, wherein Park joked about a fellow player on the server being his "sugar daddy" and made a gesture that mimicked oral sex, Park subsequently released a public apology through Twitter and stated that he would cease streaming indefinitely. In the apology, Park stated that cultural differences often led to mistranslations when he spoke in English to other streamers, which in some situations made him appear more problematic than he felt the comments originally were. However, he acknowledged that his words and actions were "immature" and that he would work more to understand the weight of his actions as a public figure.On January 9, 2022, during a Twitch stream after returning to the platform, Park said "Now that I'm not in K-pop anymore, I can say this. Why is Jamie trying to be a thot?", in reference to fellow South Korean singer Jamie Park, a friend and artist previously under the same label. Park was labelled as misogynistic by some critics during a wave of strong backlash following the incident, due to his usage of the derogatory term "thot". In an apology through Twitter soon after, he explained that he believed that "thot" was synonymous with "baddie", another slang word, and did not have any bad intentions when making the comment. Park confirmed later that he personally contacted Jamie Park to resolve the matter, and that he "[felt] terrible for making Jamie feel the way she [did]."


== Discography ==


== Songwriting ==


== Filmography ==


=== Television shows ===


=== Podcasts ===


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Jae Park at Wikimedia Commons
Jae on JYP Publishing