Anthony James Franklin (born 2 April 1962) is an English rock musician, best known for his work on the fretless bass guitar with Roy Harper, The Firm, Jimmy Page, Paul Rodgers, John Sykes' Blue Murder, David Gilmour, Kate Bush, Whitesnake, and most recently with Kenny Wayne Shepherd.


== Biography ==
Born into a musical family, Franklin first took the stage at age 5. He got his big break in 1984 as bassist in supergroup The Firm, with Jimmy Page, Paul Rodgers and Chris Slade.
Franklin's television credits include the Late Show with David Letterman, Beverly Hills 90210, The Rosie O'Donnell Show, Good Morning America, Top of the Pops (U.K.), VH-1, MTV, Don't Forget Your Toothbrush (Finland), dozens of Japanese programs and more. Sony released Tony Franklin: Not Just Another Pretty Bass, Franklin's first sample loop library, in 2006.While maintaining his music career, from September 2003 through July 2011, Franklin served as Artist Relations Manager for Fender Musical Instruments Corporation and SWR. He returned to music performance full-time in mid-2011, when he joined Kenny Wayne Shepherd's band for the tour supporting the guitarist's 2011 album, How I Go. Franklin can be heard on Shepherd's album, "Goin' Home", released in Summer 2014.


== Fretless bass ==
In January 2006 Fender introduced the Tony Franklin Fretless Precision Bass, a distinctive instrument, with an alder body and modern C-shaped maple neck with an unfinished and unfretted ebony fingerboard with side dot position markers. Other features include vintage tuners, Hipshot Bass Xtender drop-D tuner on the E string, and three-way pickup selector switch that controls an American Series Precision Bass mid pickup and a Tony Franklin signature Jazz Bass bridge pickup with hex-screw pole pieces and ceramic bar magnets.


== Other career highlights ==
Although mostly known for his fretless work, Franklin's been doing sessions with the same fretted Precision Bass for many years. Fender released the Tony Franklin Fretted Precision Bass in 2008, a replica of the instrument used throughout his career. The signature fretted bass is similar to his fretless model, with Precision and Jazz Bass pickups and a three-way selector switch that provide an array of tones. The model was discontinued in 2015.
Prior to his work with The Firm, Franklin toured and recorded with English folk/rock singer-songwriter and guitarist, Roy Harper, appearing on eight of his albums between 1982 and 2013.In 1996, Franklin played on long-time friend, Donna Lewis's album "Now in a Minute”, which spawned the worldwide smash hit single “I Love You Always Forever". Substantial touring followed the release of the single throughout the U.S., U.K., Japan, Europe and Canada.
In 1997, Franklin toured the world with Whitesnake as part of the "Last Hurrah" tour.Franklin cites John Deacon, Paul McCartney, James Jamerson and Jaco Pastorius as his main influences.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Tony Franklin website
Interview with Tony in Paisajes Eléctricos Magazine (in Spanish)