Jordan Terrell Carter (born September 13, 1995), known professionally as Playboi Carti, is an American rapper. He is recognized for his experimental musical style, gothic fashion, and mysterious public persona. Born and raised in Atlanta, Carter was initially signed to local underground label Awful Records prior to signing with ASAP Mob's AWGE Label under Interscope Records. After gaining a cult following early in his career, Carter gained mainstream attention in 2017.
Carter's debut mixtape was released in April 2017, and included the Billboard Hot 100 charting singles "Magnolia" and "Woke Up Like This" (featuring Lil Uzi Vert). His debut studio album Die Lit (2018) peaked at number 3 on the US Billboard 200. Following a two-year hiatus with little new music released, Carter's highly anticipated second album, Whole Lotta Red (2020), debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and became his first chart-topping release.


== Early life ==
Jordan Terrell Carter was born in Riverdale, Georgia, and grew up in Fairburn, Georgia. In a 2016 interview with Complex, he stated, "My ma couldn't tell me shit. Nobody could tell me shit." This type of lifestyle influenced Carter to get into trouble as a youth and sway away from the idea of pursuing a higher level of education after high school. He attended North Springs Charter High School in Sandy Springs. Before rap, Carter wanted to become an NBA star to try and make something of himself. In an interview with The Fader, he said, "I was a young AI and didn't go to practice. That was the time I was really ducking school and it was all hoop and no rap. I would smoke before practice, get on the court and drop 30." He stopped playing basketball after a disagreement with his coach, and then dedicated his time to music. Carter skipped high school classes regularly to work on his music or go to his job at H&M, which led to Carti barely graduating high school. In an interview with The Fader, he said, "I was in class with freshmen finishing work, and if I finished the nine assignments before this time I could graduate." He was so close to not graduating that no one showed up to his graduation, because they didn't know it was actually going to take place. Carti hated the idea of being an upcoming rapper working at H&M, so he made the decision to quit.Carti shopped in thrift stores in his youth, something that has had an effect on his fashion and music style.


== Career ==


=== 2011–2016: Beginnings ===
Carti began rapping at an early age under the name Sir Cartier in 2011 and soon after changed it to Playboi Carti in 2013. He began uploading songs on SoundCloud in 2011.  In 2014, after meeting producer Ethereal, he joined Awful Records. Carti credits Ethereal with helping him find his sound. Once Carti chose to pursue music full-time, he made the decision to move to New York City with some family. While in New York City, Carti stayed at his drug dealer's house, and members of ASAP Mob frequented the house. Eventually Carti ran into ASAP Bari, who eventually introduced him to ASAP Rocky.  Carti decided to go Texas with ASAP Rocky. He began to attract attention in 2015 with his singles "Broke Boi" and "Fetti" featuring Da$h and Maxo Kream, both of which were published to SoundCloud. Around this time, Carti frequently collaborated with artists in Atlanta's underground rap scene, including his cousin UnoTheActivist, Thouxanbanfauni, Yung Bans, Lil Yachty, Ethereal, and producers MexikoDro, and ICYTWAT. He began to tour with ASAP Ferg and Lil Uzi Vert, and signed a deal with Interscope Records.In 2016, he was featured on the A$AP Mob's single "Telephone Calls" from their album Cozy Tapes Vol. 1: Friends. The same year, Carti signed to the A$AP Mob's AWGE imprint and Interscope Records.


=== 2017–2018: Playboi Carti and Die Lit ===
Carti released his eponymous debut mixtape on April 14 of 2017. The release gained attention from various music publications, including XXL, Pitchfork, Spin, HotNewHipHop, and PopMatters, and reached No. 12 on the Billboard 200. The mixtape spawned two successful singles: "Magnolia", which reached number 29 on the Billboard Hot 100, and "wokeuplikethis*" featuring Lil Uzi Vert, which reached number 76. Accompanying the mixtape's release, Carti embarked on a tour with Gucci Mane and Dreezy. On June 13, 2017, Playboi Carti was named as one of the ten of XXL's "2017 Freshman Class". Around this time, he was featured on A$AP Mob's single "Raf" from their album Cozy Tapes Vol. 2: Too Cozy and Lana Del Rey's single "Summer Bummer" from her album Lust for Life.
On May 11, 2018, Carti released his debut full-length album Die Lit, which peaked at number 3 on the US Billboard 200. Months later, in August 2018, Carti announced his second studio album Whole Lotta Red.


=== 2019–present: Whole Lotta Red ===
Carti began work on his second album Whole Lotta Red late in 2018. Over the next two years, many of Carti's songs were leaked onto the internet and accumulated tens of millions of streams. He did not release any original music, instead being featured on numerous singles, including "Baguettes in the Face" featuring NAV and A Boogie wit da Hoodie from DJ Mustard's album and "Earfquake" by Tyler the Creator. In April 2020, Carti released his first new music since 2018 with the song "@ Meh", which peaked at number 35 on the Hot 100. The following month, he was featured on the single "Pain 1993" by Drake, which debuted at number 7 on the Billboard Hot 100 and became Carti's first top-ten on the chart. On November 23, 2020, Carti announced that Whole Lotta Red was complete and had been submitted to his label. On Thanksgiving Day, 2020, Carti was featured on Lil Yachty's deluxe album Lil Boat 3.5 on the song "Flex Up" with Future. The following month, hip-hop commentator DJ Akademiks announced that Whole Lotta Red was scheduled for a Christmas Day release. Carter confirmed the Christmas release date on December 21, 2020. On December 25, 2020, Carti released the 24-track long album Whole Lotta Red. It debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, becoming Carti's first chart-topping release. In June 2021, Carti was featured on rapper Lil 1 DTE's single, "Homixide" from his self-titled mixtape. In August 2021, Playboi Carti was featured on the songs "Off the Grid", "Junya", and "Junya, Pt. 2" in Kanye West's album Donda.


=== Modeling ===
Carter's fashion style is one of the main features of his public image. GQ has defined Carter as the "leader of a youth style", and said that he represents a stylistic midpoint between the "fashion gloss of A$AP Mob, the punk-rock attitude of Uzi Vert, and the playful camp of Yachty."Carter's favorite designer is Raf Simons and favorite designer label is Balmain. Carter met Simons at a fashion show in New York City. Carter is featured on the song "RAF" by A$AP Mob, which was dedicated to Raf Simons. The music video for the song included Carter, A$AP Rocky, and Quavo wearing rare Raf Simons-designed clothing. Carter considers Kanye West and A$AP Rocky inspirations for his fashion style.Carter has modeled numerous times, including for Louis Vuitton, Kanye West's Yeezy Season 5, VFiles, and Drake's OVO Lookbook, alongside Ian Connor and John Ross.He was in a commercial for Nike, Inc. and walked the runway for the late Virgil Abloh and his brand Off-White. He designs for Vlone.Carter is known for his vampire-inspired attire, making Rick Owens more mainstream.


== Musical style ==
Carter has been described as a "mumble rapper", and his music as "playful, hard-hitting, and very melodic." Complex called his style of rapping "spare and repetitive, more concerned with flow and catchy phrases." Briana Younger at Pitchfork said that "Carti’s music is less about lyricism and more about atmosphere", going on to say that "whatever Carti lacks in substance he makes up in sheer audacity."Carter is known for his "baby voice" technique, characterized by his voice hitting high pitches with unclear pronunciations and frantic cadences. He has used this technique on popular songs such as "Almeda" with Solange, "Earfquake" with Tyler, the Creator, and "Pissy Pamper" with Young Nudy and Pi'erre Bourne.
The New York Times said Carti's rapping made it appear as if he was "more at ease with the performance of the role than with the actual act of rapping."He uses Satanic imagery. His style is influenced by vampire movies. Lil Wayne inspired him to freestyle all of his raps.He is influenced by A$AP Rocky, Kanye West and Jay-Z.Carter is known for his rock star persona. His songs are often about tales of sex and drugs.


== Personal life ==
In 2017, he briefly dated American model Blac Chyna. In 2018, Carter was romantically involved with Rubi Rose, a model and rapper who rose to fame after appearing in the music video for Bad and Boujee by Migos. He allegedly shot a gun at Rose after she hid his phones before a flight. They broke up after Carter cheated on her with Blac Chyna. Later that year, Carter began dating Australian rapper Iggy Azalea. In 2020, TMZ reported that Azalea gave birth to Carter's son. Later, Azalea revealed their son's name to be Onyx Kelly. They reportedly split in December 2019. In December 2020, Azalea revealed Carter had cheated on her and missed her son’s birth. Carter refused to sign their son’s birth certificate. He cheated on her with Instagram model Brandi Marion.As of June 2019, Carter was currently living and working in and around the Atlanta area after relocating from Los Angeles.Carter has asthma.


=== Legal issues ===
Carter punched a driver in Gretna, Scotland during his concert tour in February 2018. He was subsequently fined £800 after a trial.


== Discography ==

Die Lit (2018)
Whole Lotta Red (2020)
Narcissist (TBA)


== Awards and nominations ==


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== iHeartRadio Music Awards ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website