Marika Kouno (高野 麻里佳, Kōno Marika, born February 22, 1994) is a Japanese voice actress and singer from Tokyo, Japan. She was previously affiliated with the agency Mausu Promotion, but is currently affiliated with Aoni Production. Debuting as a voice actress in 2013, she played her first main role as Rin Kohana in the 2015 anime television series Seiyu's Life!. She, together with the other main cast members of Seiyu's Life, are also members of the music group Earphones. She is known for her roles as Yua Nakajima in Hinako Note, and Silence Suzuka in Uma Musume Pretty Derby.


== Biography ==
Kouno was born in Tokyo on February 22, 1994. She is the second of three sisters; her older sister Rina is a dancer. As a child, she was already fond of reading aloud during elementary school classes. She first became interested in voice acting from watching anime series. After learning that the characters Pikachu from Pokémon and Chopper from One Piece were voiced by the same person, Ikue Ōtani, Kouno began to aspire pursuing a career in voice acting.Upon entering high school, Kouno joined her school's voice acting club, where she studied the performances of voice actors. She also participated in other activities such as playing basketball. After her graduation, she enrolled in a training school operated by the Yoyogi Animation Academy. She completed her studies in 2014, and became affiliated with the Mausu Promotion agency the same year.Kouno began her career playing minor roles in anime series such as Aikatsu!, Log Horizon, and Rail Wars!. She then played the roles of Utako Uta and Pakuko in Chikasugi Idol Akae-chan, which was also the first time she performed a song in an anime. The following year, she was cast in her first main role as Rin Kohana in the anime series Seiyu's Life!. She, together with her Seiyu's Life co-stars Rie Takahashi and Yuki Nagaku, formed the music group Earphones. She also became a member of the idol group Team Ohenro.In 2017, Kouno played the roles of Yua Nakajima in Hinako Note, and Yumina Urnea Belfast in In Another World With My Smartphone. She was also announced to be voicing the character Silence Suzuka in the multimedia franchise Uma Musume Pretty Derby. In 2018, she played the role of Sat-chan in Mitsuboshi Colors, and she reprised the role of Silence Suzuka for the anime series of Uma Musume Pretty Derby.On October 1, 2020, she transferred to Aoni Production.On February 24, 2020, Kouno made her solo singer debut under Nippon Columbia with the release of her first single, "Yume Mitai, demo Yume janai" (夢みたい、でも夢じゃない).


== Filmography ==


=== TV anime ===
2014Aikatsu!, Girl
Chikasugi Idol Akae-chan, Utako Uta, Pakuko
Log Horizon 2, Shimai Momoiro (ep 7), Kurinon (eps 21, 24–25)
Ohenro: Hachihachi Aruki, Megumi
Rail Wars!, Kaori (ep 3), Nami Jōgasaki (ep 4)
Shōnen Hollywood -Holly Stage for 49-, Riko Yasuda2015Chivalry of a Failed Knight, Student, Girl
Food Wars!: Shokugeki no Soma, Service division girl D (ep 14)
Is the Order a Rabbit?, Commoner club member C (ep 10)
Mikagura School Suite, Friend
Overlord, Nemu Emmot, Vampire Bride (ep 10)
Prison School, Couple Woman (ep 3)
Seiyu's Life!, Rin Kohana
Show by Rock!!, Shibarin
The Fruit of Grisaia, Danny's sister
The Heroic Legend of Arslan, Merchant's daughter (ep 9)
Valkyrie Drive: Mermaid, E9
Your Lie in April, Female student2016Flip Flappers, Nyunyu
Phantasy Star Online 2 The Animation, Marika
Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World, Petra Leyte
Scorching Ping Pong Girls, Hanabi Tenka
Show by Rock!!#, Shibarin
The Disastrous Life of Saiki K., Maimai (ep 20)2017Akiba's Trip: The Animation, Niwaka Denkigai
Hinako Note, Yua Nakajima
In Another World With My Smartphone, Yumina Urnea Belfast2018Mitsuboshi Colors, Sat-chan
Onii-chan is Done For, Mahiro Oyama
Slow Start, Sachi Tsubakimori
Uma Musume Pretty Derby, Silence Suzuka2019Azur Lane, Siren Purifier
After School Dice Club, Aya Takayashiki
Cautious Hero: The Hero Is Overpowered but Overly Cautious, Nina
Granbelm, Claire Fugo
If It's for My Daughter, I'd Even Defeat a Demon Lord, Sylvia
No Guns Life, Scarlett Gosling
We Never Learn, Mizuki Yuiga2020By the Grace of the Gods, Miya
Digimon Adventure:, Mimi Tachikawa
Mewkledreamy, Nene
Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World 2nd Season, Petra Leyte
Seton Academy: Join the Pack!, Shiho Ihara2021D_Cide Traumerei the Animation, Eri Ibusaki
Eden, Sara Grace
Scarlet Nexus, Tsugumi Nazar
Uma Musume Pretty Derby Season 2, Silence Suzuka


=== Anime films ===
2013Bayonetta: Bloody Fate
Hinata no Aoshigure, Students2015Wake Up, Girls! Beyond the Bottom, Noa Morina2016Digimon Adventure tri.- Chapter 2: 
Determination
Digimon Adventure tri.- Chapter 3: Confession
Pop in Q


=== Video games ===
2014Tokyo 7th Sisters, Miu Aihara
Toys Drive, Parute Leonard2015Criminal Girls 2: Party Favors, Enri
Shirohime Quest, Uwajimajō
Zettai Geigeki Wars, Kikka
Fire Emblem Fates Midoriko/Midori2016Mary Skelter: Nightmares, Shirayukihime
Shironeko Project, Mari2017Alternative Girls, Chiho Onitsuka
Blue Reflection: Sword of the Girl Who Dances in Illusions, Yuzuki Shijou
Yuki Yuna is a Hero: A Sparkling Flower, Hinata Uesato
Gangan Pixies, Bītan/Usamaeru
Samurai Warriors: Spirit of Sanada, ChachaKirara Fantasia, Lamp2018Alice Gear Aegis, Mutsumi Koashi
Magia Record, Leila Ibuki
Browndust, Elin
Grimms Echoes, Gretel2019Azur Lane, Hatsuharu
Azur Lane Crosswave, Siren PurifierFire Emblem Three Houses, KronyaKonoSuba: Fantastic Days, Melissa2021Uma Musume Pretty Derby, Silence Suzuka
Scarlet Nexus, Tsugumi Nazar
Fate/Grand Order, Fairy Knight Lancelot (Melusine)
Arknights, La Pluma
Alchemy Stars, Maggie
NEO: The World Ends with You, Coco Atarashi
Samurai Warriors 5, Mitsuki
Pokémon Masters EX, Evelyn
Granblue Fantasy, Enyo
2022


=== Live-action ===
Anime Supremacy! (2022), Aoi Gunno


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Official agency profile (in Japanese)
Marika Kouno  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Marika Kouno at IMDb