Katherine Bergeron is an American academic administrator who serves as the 11th President of Connecticut College in New London, Connecticut. Selected by the College's Board of Trustees in August 2013, she took office on January 1, 2014.


== Early life and education ==
Bergeron was born in New London, Connecticut in 1958. She earned a bachelor of arts degree in music from Wesleyan University and master and doctoral degrees in music from Cornell University.


== Career ==
As a musician and a historian, Bergeron's scholarship has focused on French music and culture of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. She is a two-time recipient of the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publisher' Deems-Taylor Award for her books Decadent Enchantments (University of California Press, 1998) and Voice Lessons (Oxford University Press, 2010). Voice Lessons also received the Otto Kinkeldey Award from the American Musicological Society.
Bergeron has held professorships at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Tufts University, University of California at Berkeley, and at Brown University, where she also served as dean of the college from 2006 to 2013.On August 20, 2013, the Connecticut College Board of Trustees elected Bergeron as the 11th president of Connecticut College. Bergeron took office on January 1, 2014.


== President of Connecticut College ==
Bergeron has supported overhauling the Connecticut College curriculum. During her tenure, Connecticut College received the largest gift in its history to support financial aid, career education, and athletics. The College also completed a $10 million renovation of the Charles E. Shain Library that transformed the mid-century facility into a more modern space. The library has received several design awards for its architecture.


== Personal life ==
Bergeron is married to Joseph Butch Rovan, a composer and multimedia artist who is professor of music at Brown University and former director of the Brown Arts Institute.


== Published works ==
A selection of Bergeron's publications include:

Bergeron, K. (1992). Disciplining Music: Musicology and Its Canons, ed., Katherine Bergeron and Philip Bohlman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Bergeron, K. (1998). Decadent Enchantments: The Revival of Gregorian Chant at Solesmes. Berkeley: University of California Press
Bergeron, K. (2004). Music, Rhythm, Language. Special Issue of Representations, ed. Katherine Bergeron vol. 86 (Spring)
Bergeron, K. (2010). Voice Lessons: French Mélodie in the Belle Epoque. New York: Oxford University Press
Bergeron, K. (2011). The Free Elective Curriculum. Piotr Wilczek and Mark O’Connor, eds., Collegium/ College/ Kolegium: College and the Academic Community in the European and the American Tradition. Uniwersytet Warszawski.
Bergeron, K. (2012) A Tradition of Reform: The Curriculum at Brown University. Paul Blackmore and Camille Kandiko, eds., Strategic Curriculum Change in Universities: Global Trends. London: Routledge
Bergeron, K. (2014). Listening to Write. Christiane Donahue, ed. The Power of Writing. Hanover, New Hampshire: University Press of New England


== References ==

Katherine Bergeron, President of Connecticut College