Demet Özdemir (born 26 February 1992) is a Turkish actress, comedian, model and dancer.


== Life and career ==
Özdemir was born on 26 February 1992 as the youngest of three children. She moved to Istanbul with her mother and siblings after her parents' divorce, when she was seven years old.Her grandmother was the one of Turkish minorities in Bulgaria (a.k.a Bulgarian Turk). She immigrated from Bulgaria to Turkey. Her grandmother and her brother later immigrated to Germany Initially, she was a backup dancer for Bengü and later joined the dance group of Efes Kızları. Özdemir then appeared on Mustafa Sandal's music video "Ateş Et ve Unut" and soon she had her first casting for Fox's new series Sana Bir Sır Vereceğim alongside her first partner Ekin Koç, and she portrayed the character of "Aylin" with electric power. The series has a huge fanbase since then.
Later, she portrayed the character of "Ayla" on Kurt Seyit ve Şura, and got a role as "Demet" in the movie Tut Sözünü. She then played the character of "Aslı" on Star TV's series Çilek Kokusu. Özdemir also appeared in Bengü's music video "Hodri Meydan".In 2016, Özdemir played the lead role "Lale Yenilmez" in the Turkish romantic comedy series No 309. It ended on 25 October 2017 with 65 episodes. It was aired in Venezuela, Paraguay, Chile, Bolivia, Spain, Romania, and Hungary as well.
From 2018 to 2019, she played the lead role "Sanem" in the Turkish romantic comedy series Erkenci Kuş (Daydreamer) opposite Can Yaman . She received the Best Actress award at the 2019 Murex d'Or in Lebanon for her role in this series. Erkenci Kuş was aired many times as prime-time in Italy and the actress was invited at the popular entertainment show Verissimo. Her interview was watched by over 3.5 million people.
In November 2019, she became a brand ambassador for Pantene Turkey.Between 2019 and 2021, Özdemir played the lead role "Zeynep" in Doğduğun Ev Kaderindir (My Home, My Destiny). The series is produced by OGM Pictures, directed by Çağrı Bayrak and premiered on TV8 on 25 December 2019. The script is inspired by Gülseren Budayıcıoğlu's novel Camdaki Kız.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Demet Özdemir on Instagram
Demet Özdemir on Twitter