Baaba Maal (born 13 June 1953) is a Senegalese singer and guitarist born in Podor, on the Senegal River. In addition to acoustic guitar, he also plays percussion. He has released several albums, both for independent and major labels. In July 2003, he was made a UNDP Youth Emissary.Maal sings primarily in Pulaar and promotes the traditions of the Pulaar-speaking people, who live on either side of the Senegal River in the ancient Senegalese kingdom of Futa Tooro.


== Early life and education ==
Maal was expected to follow in his father's profession and become a fisherman. However, under the influence of his lifelong friend and family gawlo, blind guitarist Mansour Seck, Maal devoted himself to learning music from his mother and his school's headmaster. He went on to study music at the university in Dakar before leaving for postgraduate studies on a scholarship at Beaux-Arts in Paris.


== Career ==
After returning from study in Paris, Maal studied traditional music with Mansour Seck and began performing with the band Daande Lenol. Maal's fusions continued into the next decade with his Firin' in Fouta (1994) album, which used ragga, salsa and Breton harp music to create a popular sound that launched the careers of Positive Black Soul, a group of rappers, and also led to the formation of Afro Celt Sound System.  His fusion tendencies continued on 1998's Nomad Soul, which featured Brian Eno as one of seven producers.  In addition to his various solo releases, he contributed to two tracks, "Bushes" and "Dunya Salam", on the concept album 1 Giant Leap.
In 1998, Maal recorded "Bess, You Is My Woman Now" for the Red Hot Organization's compilation album Red Hot + Rhapsody: The Gershwin Groove, a tribute to George Gershwin which raised money for various charities devoted to increasing HIV/AIDS awareness and fighting the disease. In 2002, Maal again worked with the Red Hot Organization, recording "No Agreement" alongside Res, Tony Allen, Ray Lema, Positive Black Soul and Archie Shepp; as well as "Trouble Sleep Yanga Wake Am" alongside Taj Mahal and featuring Kaouding Cissoko and Antibalas, for the tribute album to Fela Kuti, Red Hot + Riot: The Music and Spirit of Fela Kuti.
On 7 July 2007, Maal performed at the Live Earth concert, Johannesburg.
Maal's album On the Road, a live acoustic album recorded straight from the mixing boards of his shows over a ten-year period, was released in 2008. A new studio album, Television, was released in 2009.
He appears on two tracks "Hunger" and "Still" on the Black Hawk Down film soundtrack and performed on the title track of the 2008 video game Far Cry 2, in addition to helping to create the whole soundtrack for that game. He played at Bonnaroo and the Sierra Nevada World Music Festival in 2010.
On 4 May 2013, Maal performed at the 2013 edition of the Harare International Festival of the Arts in Zimbabwe.
In 2014, he contributed to the BBC Music's remake of The Beach Boys song "God Only Knows".Maal's 11th studio album, The Traveller, recorded with Johan Hugo from the Very Best and Winston Marshall (Mumford & Sons), was released via Palm and Marathon Artists The lead singles, "Fulani Rock" and "Gilli Men", received critical acclaim. in January 2016, and was accompanied by a UK tour and headlining Senegal's Festival Blues Du Fleuve. Maal accompanied Mumford & Sons on their Gentlemen of the Road tour around South Africa in 2015. He also released a song and accompanying live performance music video with Mumford & Sons called "There Will Be Time".In 1998 he was honoured by the Dutch-based Prince Claus Fund, which rewards people who have a progressive and contemporary approach to the themes of culture and development.He voiced the Wakandan soundtrack of Black Panther for Ludwig Göransson.In an interview with The Metropolitan Museum of Art in 2020, Maal discussed the ritual quality of traditional instruments, and how he chooses instruments to convey his songs' messages: "The spirit of the kora  and the ngoni are different from the talking drum and the balafon, or the sabar and the djembe. The kora and ngoni are closer to human beings, because they are made from things that had life. The talking drum, the balafon, and the sabar are made from wood, and when you listen to them your mind goes out into the forest. When you make music and write songs, you have to know about the messages. From the messages, you know what the instruments are and how to put them together underneath the lyrics."


== Giving back ==
On December 11, 2019, Maal promised to fight to stop the desertification in the Sahel by planting trees. He said he hoped every person in Senegal could say they planted a tree.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
1989 – Passion – Sources (compilation) -  Real World Records
1989 – Djam Leelii (with Mansour Seck) – Mango Records
1991 – Baayo (with Mansour Seck) – Mango
1992 – Lam Toro – Mango
1994 – Wango – Syllart
1994 – Firin' in Fouta – Mango
1995 – Gorel – 4th & Broadway
1997 – Taara – Melodie
1998 – Nomad Soul – Import
1998 – Djam Leelii: The Adventurers – Yoff Productions
2000 – Jombaajo – Sonodisc
2001 – Missing You (Mi Yeewnii) – Palm
2003 – The Best of the Early Years  (compilation) – Wrasse
2005 – Palm World Voices: Baaba Maal (compilation) – Palm
2008 – On The Road (compilation) – Palm
2009 – Television – Palm
2016 – The Traveller – Palm / Marathon Artists


=== Import releases ===
Jombaajo
Ngalanka
Ndilane


=== Contributing artist ===
1999 – Unwired: Acoustic Music from Around the World – World Music Network
2013 – The Rough Guide to the Music of Senegal – World Music Network
2009 - Television with Brazilian Girls – Palm
2016 – Johannesburg with Mumford and Sons – Glassnote Entertainment Group


=== DVDs ===
1999 – Live at the Royal Festival Hall – Palm Pictures


== References ==


== External links ==
Baaba Maal – official site
Baaba Maal discography at Discogs