Adult Mom is an indie rock band founded by musician Stevie Knipe. Initially a solo project, Adult Mom has now expanded into a full band including guitarist Allegra Eidinger and drummer Olivia Battell. They have released three full-length albums and multiple EPs, most recently 2021’s Driver on Epitaph Records.


== Career ==
Adult Mom began in 2012 in Stevie Knipe's bedroom, where they recorded an EP and released on Bandcamp titled Bedroom Recordings. The following year, Knipe released two EP's, one titled bstmommy and the other titled "Mom's Day".In August 2014, Knipe released a mini-album titled i fell in love by accident. In July 2014, Knipe released another EP titled Sometimes Bad Happens. The EP was listed at number four on Rolling Stone's "10 Best Cassettes of 2014" list. Adult Mom was also part of a split alongside Cyberbully Mom Club and i tried to run away when i was 6. In 2015, Knipe released their first album on Tiny Engines titled Momentary Lapse of Happily.On May 19, 2017 Adult Mom released their second album, entitled Soft Spots, with label Tiny Engines.On November 9, 2019, Knipe published a series of tweets accusing Tiny Engines of withholding three years of royalty payments. Tiny Engines ultimately repaid them and subsequently agreed to return the masters for both records released by the label.Their third full-length album Driver, which was produced by Stevie Knipe and Kyle Pulley at Headroom Studios in Philadelphia, was announced for release on March 5, 2021 via Epitaph Records.It received a rating of 7.3 from Pitchfork.In March, 2021, Adult Mom was featured in Guitar World Magazine, in which Stevie Knipe and Allegra Eidinger "discuss driving forward with intention and welcoming their pop sensibilities".


== Personal life ==
Knipe identifies as genderqueer, as mentioned in several of their songs, such as "Survival." Knipe attended State University of New York at Purchase, where they studied anthropology and began writing music. They cite Alanis Morissette, The Cranberries, Rilo Kiley, and Bright Eyes as musical influences. Their early musical interests also include The Jonas Brothers, Britney Spears, and The Spice Girls. Knipe started playing the guitar when they were fifteen.


== Band members ==
Stevie Knipe - Songwriting/guitar/vocals
Olivia Battell - Drums
Allegra Eidinger - Lead Guitar


== Discography ==
Albums

Momentary Lapse of Happily (2015, Tiny Engines)
Soft Spots (2017, Tiny Engines)
Driver (2021, Epitaph)EPs

bedroom recordings (2012)
i fell in love by accident (2013)
bstmommy (2013)
mom's day (2013)
Sometimes Bad Happens (2014)


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City


== References ==