Christine Harstad Schuff (formerly Christoforos Schuff; born February 6, 1979 in Sacramento, California as Christopher Michael Schuff) is a former Greek-Orthodox priest, musician and artist, recognized for her humanitarian work and social activism. She has held discourses on religion and society, social justice, human rights and participates in inter-faith dialogue. Schuff has appeared in the media regularly, especially in Norway and Greece, since 2006. She has been the subject of several documentaries and in various programs in Europe and the United States for her work with refugees.Schuff has been described as "a bit unorthodox" and "Colorful in black", due to her way of life and stances on certain religious and social issues.


== Early life and education ==
Schuff was born in Carmichael, Sacramento County, California as the child of John W. Schuff and Lynn M. Mapes. Schuff has one older brother and in her teenage years resided periodically with two foster families. At 17 she was featured in The Sacramento Bee as an up-and-coming magician.Schuff was enrolled in two private, Christian schools until completing middle school and graduated from Rio Americano High School in 1997. She has a master's degree in religious studies from the University of Agder in Norway, a graduate diploma in music pedagogy from the Ministry of Education, Research and Religious Affairs of Greece, in addition to undergraduate studies in subjects such as linguistics, history, pedagogy and organic agriculture. She is a certified teacher (lektor) in Norway.


== Religious life ==
Schuff attended several non-denominational churches in the Sacramento area throughout her childhood and youth. From 2001 Schuff resided for extended periods of time annually at the Saint Ignatios Monastery (Limonos Monastery) on the Greek Island of Lesvos where she was baptized in 2006. She was ordained a deacon under the Archdiocese of Russian Orthodox churches in Western Europe in Paris in 2007 and a priest in 2008 in Oslo.Schuff has said that she feared being excommunicated or defrocked by The Orthodox church for her positions and beliefs, commenting "I sometimes wonder if I can continue to wear the same dress as priests who have ideas totally opposed to mine."


== Civic engagement ==
She is known for promoting sustainable living and for advocating for fair and equal treatment of often marginalized groups such as immigrants, refugees, indigenous peoples and the poor. In the Fall of 2010 she allowed a Serbian family from Kosovo to receive church asylum in her home, which also housed a chapel. She started the organization "Filoxenos" in 2013, focusing on work with the Romani people, beggars, immigrants and refugees. She has been noted for her role in the refugee crisis on Lesbos. She has been active in the anti-war movement through her music and art, speeches and writings and she often ends her appearances with the phrase: "Fuck injustice and God damn the war!".
In 2013, Schuff received the Focus Award (Fokusprisen) from the deacons' association of the Norwegian Church, for her work with homeless Romani immigrants. In 2015 she was given the Bridgebuilder Award (Brobyggerprisen) by the Norwegian Church Academy (Norske kirkeakademier) for her civic engagement for the poor. On MLK Day 2017 she was awarded the MLK Non-Violence Prize (Ikkevoldsprisen), for her participation in non-violent political demonstrations, her "fearless stances" and work with the poor and refugees. She received the LGBT+ Pride Award in 2017 from the National Association for Lesbians, Gays, Bisexuals and Transgender People of Southern Norway.


=== Marriage Equality ===
Schuff has supported LGBT Rights, same-sex marriage and marriage equality for what she has called "love in all its forms" and the right for "people of age to live consensually in relationship forms of their choosing," including in polyamorous relationships. Her position on marriage equality has been criticized as being at odds with much of mainstream Christianity and the doctrine of the Eastern Orthodox Church.


=== Arrest ===

On April 10, 2016, Schuff was arrested for demonstrating without a permit in front of the Norwegian Parliament (Storting) together with five other demonstrators. Schuff and the other demonstrators submitted peacefully to the arrest. They were released April 11, 2016, charged with holding an unlawful demonstration and for refusing to obey police officer orders. Schuff was convicted by the District Court of Oslo. For ideological reasons, Schuff has refused to pay the 11,000 Norwegian kroner (NOK) fine. According to Schuff, the peaceful demonstration was intended to cast light upon the situation of refugees and asylum seekers in Norway and Europe following a law proposal making the criteria for seeking and receiving asylum in Norway much stricter. Several weeks later Schuff spoke at a parliamentary hearing on this proposal. According to the newspaper Vårt Land, it had been almost thirty years since the last time a priest had been arrested for a political demonstration in Norway. While Schuff appealed the conviction, citing the right to freedom of speech and the freedom of assembly, as stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, her appeal was rejected. Eventually Schuff will have to spend twenty-two days in jail for the conviction.


== Music and Art ==
As a musician and singer, Schuff uses the pseudonyms "justXx". Earlier she periodically appeared with her ex-wife, using the name "Simpleminded". Some of her music is characterized by social political messages, where she periodically uses profanity, such as in her anti-war song "God damn the war"(2010) and several of her raps, including "War and More" (2011). Her music receives periodic radio play on NRK. Schuffs art has been featured in a number of exhibitions, with her art expressing social and political messages. Schuff has also done minor voiceover work for various film projects, such as for the film Yohan: The Child Wanderer and in the documentary "Med rett til å kapre", broadcast on NRK. Schuff appeared in a cameo role in the series Okkupert, broadcast on TV2 and streamed on Netflix.


== Personal life ==
In 2000 Schuff married the Norwegian Hildegunn Marie Tønnessen, they moved to Norway shortly thereafter and have three children together. She and her family have previously lived extended periods of time in Greece since 2001. In the Fall of 2017 she filed for separation and the divorce was finalized in 2018. Following the separation she has shared custody of their three common children. Schuff married Helene Harstad on Sicily in May 2019. For ideological reasons, Schuff does not own a personal vehicle and she currently resides in a cabin in the forest of Greipstad in Songdalen in Southern Norway.


== Health ==
In January 2013 it was revealed in an interview in Fædrelandsvennen that Schuff had been diagnosed with Follicular lymphoma in the Fall of 2012, a form of cancer which, while indolent, is generally considered medically incurable after Stage I.


== Awards and recognition ==
Schuff has received various awards for her humanitarian work and activism.

Focus Award (Civil Service Award) (2013)
Bridgebuilder Award (2015)
MLK Non-Violence Award (2017)
LGBT+ Pride Award (2017)


== Discography ==
My Friend – single (2009/2012)
God damn the war – single (2011)
War and More – single (2011)
Christmas Song – single (2011)
Recuerdo – single (2012)
Hellige natt – single (2014) [17]
Para siempre – single (2015), under the pseudonym Chris Padrino


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Christine Harstad Schuff at IMDb
NRK-article: “Presten som må protestere” (“The Priest who must protest”) April 17, 2016
Tørst-article: "Enlightenment in black" (Translated from Norwegian)[18]