Michael David Faist (; born January 5, 1992) is an American actor, singer, and dancer. He is best known for his role as Riff, the leader of the Jets, in Steven Spielberg's West Side Story, for which he received a nomination for Best Actor in a Supporting Role at the 75th British Academy Film Awards, as well as for originating the role of Connor Murphy in the Broadway musical Dear Evan Hansen, for which he was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical and won a Grammy Award for Best Musical Theatre Album and a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Musical Performance in a Daytime Program. He also originated the role of Morris Delancey in Disney's Newsies.
Faist appeared in the feature films The Unspeakable Act (2012), The Grief of Others (2015), and starred in I Can I Will I Did (2017), Wildling (2018), The Atlantic City Story (2020), and Panic (2021).


== Early life and education ==
Faist was born and raised in Gahanna, Ohio. His adoptive parents are Julia and Kurt Faist. They own a real estate business that he grew up helping with during the summers by doing construction work.When he was a kid, he was enticed by dancing after seeing Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire in old MGM films, especially Kelly in Singin' in the Rain. "Just the way he performed and moved, he was able to tell a story through movement," Faist said. At the age of 5, he pressured his parents to enroll him in dance classes and began auditioning for community theater and children's theater. In a Columbus Children's Theatre production of The Wizard of Oz, he played one of the Lollipop Guild, later joining the cast of Oliver! and Alice in Wonderland. After watching MGM musicals growing up, he realized he wanted to pursue a career in the performing arts. He fell in love with acting through mentorship from Don Roberts, a leader at the local The Academy of Performing Arts (TAPA) company in Columbus. Also assisting him in his development was Cynthia Macioce, a teacher at Gahanna Lincoln High School where he played Danny Zuko in Grease and Simon in Jesus Christ Superstar.He moved to New York at the age of 17 to pursue a stage career after graduating from high school a year early in 2009. He enrolled the American Musical and Dramatic Academy but dropped out after two semesters. While auditioning for off-Broadway plays, he began selling tickets in Times Square. On his first job as a professional actor in the play White Christmas, he was collecting food stamps, earning $150 per week, and living in the back of a McDonald's parking lot.


== Career ==


=== Theatre ===
Faist began his theatre career in 2011, starring as the original Morris Delancey, a bully and publisher Joseph Pulitzer's henchman, in the regional premiere of Newsies. When the musical transferred to Broadway, he understudied the lead role of Jack Kelly, a newsboy who leads his colleagues in a strike against the publisher,  in addition to his other roles. Faist had to alternately play the roles in quick succession during the opening number. "You have to really make sure you're warmed up vocally and physically and you're mentally prepared," Faist said of the demands of his dual role, but added, "It's not hard to have fun in Newsies, about the uprising of children, a new generation coming in to take over the old."He went on to star as Rhys Thurston in Appropriate Off-Broadway in 2014, and as tutor Aleksei Belyaev opposite Peter Dinklage in A Month in the Country Off-Broadway in February 2015.In August 2015, he originated the role of Connor Murphy in the original Broadway production of Dear Evan Hansen, earning him a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Featured Role in a Musical in 2017. The cast also won the Grammy Award for Best Musical Theatre Album and the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Musical Performance in a Daytime Program for their performance of  "You Will Be Found" on The Today Show. Of his process for developing his character, a suicidal high school student, Faist said that he "read stories by real survivors on a website, livethroughthis.org. I realized that there seems to be a general lack of self-love and empathy in our society. I hope that when people see the show, they'll say, 'Oh, I am loved. I'm exactly who I am, and I am enough'." His interview with Live Through This founder Dese'Rae L. Stage, who inspired his performance, is featured on Time magazine. Along with cast members Ben Levi Ross and Mallory Bechtel, Faist lent his voice for the audiobook version of Val Emmich's Dear Evan Hansen: The Novel, a book adaptation of the musical released in October 2018.In October 2017, he taught Improv and acting exercises in a Broadway Musical Theatre Workshop and also held a Master Class for audition technique and song interpretation. He taught the same class in Montreal in November. In 2018, he starred in the Second Stage Theater production of Days of Rage as Spence, a conflicted and passionate young man torn between causes and women.


=== Film and television ===
Faist made his film debut as Tony in the coming-of-age drama The Unspeakable Act (2012) which premiered to favorable reviews. In 2015, he appeared as Skip in the short film Yellow, a psychiatric ward patient in Touched with Fire, and Gordie Joiner in The Grief of Others which received critical and generally positive reviews. He was also cast in an unaired pilot of the series Eye Candy as Olsen. He continued to feature in independent films the likes of Our Time (2016) as Benny, I Can I Will I Did (2017) in the starring role of Ben, and Active Adults (2017) as a teenage boy. He also appeared in crime procedural dramas Law & Order Special Victims Unit in a 2017 episode as Glenn Lawrence, and Deception (2018) in an episode as Ben "Mekka" Evans. In 2018, he appeared opposite Liv Tyler as Lawrence Fuller, a bully killed in the horror-fantasy film Wildling. In 2020, he played a starring role as Arthur in The Atlantic City Story.He played his first main role in a television series as Dodge Mason in Amazon's teen drama thriller Panic (2021). The New York Times described him as tall and lanky, making quite a striking figure in the series, "With a slender charisma and a bone structure that seems to have been sculpted with a scythe, the actor could easily have embarked on Panic. But his sensitivity is closer to that of leading men as atypical as Adam Driver, and he modernizes a potentially versatile piece."Faist made his first major movie role in Steven Spielberg's 2021 film adaptation of West Side Story as Riff, Tony's bestfriend and leader of the Jets gang. The film was a critical success with some critics deeming it superior to the original 1961 film. His performance earned praise from both audience and critics. The Washington Post regards his magnetic performance as West Side Story's "stand-out" as its chief film critic Ann Hornaday calls Faist a "revelation … who is not only a gifted singer and dancer, but plays Jets gang leader Riff with just the right mix of spiky resentment, hair-trigger anger and loose-limbed grace". On his collaboration with Faist, screenwriter Tony Kushner says, "He really wants to think about economics, politics, psychology, and psychotechnology, and he feeds himself with a kind of acuity and precision that I think is the mark of a great actor." To craft a new version of the iconic Jets leader, Faist took inspiration from a 1959 Bruce Davidson photography book entitled Brooklyn Gang. "You look at those photos and you see these people, the nihilism that exists, their inability to see past tomorrow, or even today for that matter. There's something depressing about it, also carnal, wild, and primal," Faist explained. For his performance, Faist received a nomination for Best Actor in a Supporting Role at the 75th British Academy Film Awards.
In February 2022, it was announced that Faist would join Zendaya and Josh O’Connor to star in Luca Guadagnino’s Challengers as Art, husband of Tashi, a tennis player turned coach.


== Personal life ==
Faist met his birth mother and her family, who are mostly pilots by profession, shortly before moving to New York at the age of 17. The eldest of his two half-brothers  taught him to fly until Faist obtained his pilot's license. His own reading list, which includes Kurt Vonnegut's Slaughterhouse Five and Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's Wind, Sand and Stars, was mentioned in the hit Broadway musical Dear Evan Hansen as Connor's favorite books.Faist writes short stories and has stated that it is important for an actor to attempt to write in order to understand and portray scripts. He helped to establish a playwright's festival, the Ohio Artists Gathering, which he described as " a one-week theater festival bringing artists from New York and LA and integrating them with local actors, writers, and directors.” The first festival was held in Columbus, Ohio in 2018.He was featured in Vogue's April 2017 issue with Gigi Hadid introducing him and his contemporaries as Broadway's rising male stars.


== Acting credits ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Theatre ===


== Soundtrack ==


=== Cast album ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Mike Faist at IMDb
Mike Faist at the Internet Broadway Database