Daniel Alejandro Morales Reyes ((1992-05-05)5 May 1992), known by his stage name Danny Ocean, is a Venezuelan singer, songwriter and record producer born in Caracas, Venezuela. He began his professional music career in 2009 with the creation of his YouTube channel.
He is best known for his song "Me Rehúso", released in September 2016, and relaunched as an English version titled "Baby I Won't" in 2017.


== Biography ==
Daniel Alejandro Morales Reyes, was born on May 5th. Of 1992 and raised in Caracas, Venezuela, in a Catholic family. He is an only child. His parents, named Caroll Antonietta  Reyes Colomine and his father Victor Jose Morales Rebolledo. Most part of his childhood he was traveling in different countries, due to the profession of his mother (writer), coming to live in the countries of Japan, Saint Vincent and Namibia in Africa. It was not until he was thirteen when he returned to his native country permanently. He had the proud taste and passion for music from a very young age imitating sounds of electronic devices at home, his father is also a musician and pianist and greatly influenced his growth in music and professional career "My dad is a great musician so (this talent) runs through my veins a bit. I spent 4 years in a conservatory as a child, but my music has been mostly for myself, for my desire to continue learning, in my room experimenting and playing with sounds", he confessed in an interview for the web portal Radio Caliente Santa Cruz. In his last years at school.
He graduated as a graphic designer in Caracas, at the Nueva Esparta University in Los Naranjos and then had to emigrate to the city of Miami in Florida, United States. From the moment he arrived he’s career took a peak when his song “me rehuso” became the one of the of the most played songs in the city. He had a girlfriend with whom he was in love and had to leave her behind to start a new path, for which he wrote the lyrics of «Me Rehuso».


== Artistic career ==


=== 2009-2015: Beginnings and first EPs ===
Ocean joined the music production industry around 2009 when he opened his YouTube channel by recording his friends singing hip hop and collaborating with them vocally. At this time he also developed a hobby for electronic music in English under the pseudonym Danny O.C.T. He producing electronic music songs such as "Backstage," included in the compilation album Desolat X-Sampler Purple. He published his first EPs, "Paracaídas" (2014) and "U-YE" (2015), on the iTunes and Amazon Music platforms.


=== 2016-2018: Me rehúso and international success ===
Later, he recovers his video channel on YouTube and premieres his first promotional song "Me rehúso" (composed and produced by him, in an amateur way), relaunched in 2017 due to its late success in several countries in Europe, Latin America and the United States. with an English version of it, called "Baby I Won't."
He appeared on the album Kloth Talk by hip hop music producer DJ Katastraphy with the song "Replay" with singer and rapper Bri Nichole, Rello Muse, and rapper Philup Banks, and on the song "Lookin 'For" by UK singer, DJ, songwriter, mixer and record producer Nicholas Gale, better known as Digital Farm Animals. In June of the same year he signed with the Atlantic Records label of Warner Music Group for his music in English, while his music in Spanish would be commissioned by Folio Group and Warner Music.
At the end of 2017, he premiered the music videos of his songs "Me Rehúso" and "Baby I Won't" (English version) and released the songs "Veneno," "Vuelva" and "Dembow." In August 2018, he premiered the video clip of his song "Epa Wei," produced jointly with producer, singer, disc jockey, multi-instrumentalist, video clip director, composer and musician, Sonny John Moore, better known by his stage name, Skrillex and which the American singer and producer John Ryan also participates, who already participated in the song "Fireball" by the singer and music producer, Pitbull, . In November of the same year, he was part of the Coldplay EP (under their pseudonym "Los Unidades") Global Citizen — EP 1 on the track "Voodoo," along with French EDM disc jockey and record producer, Pierre David Guetta, better known as David Guetta, Stargate, Tiwa Savage and Wizkid.


=== 2019-present: 54 + 1 ===
In 2019, he published the promotional theme "Swing" and in March 2019 he published his debut album 54 + 1, produced by himself and mastered by Ricardo Sangiao. He joined the Mexican band Reik on their album Ahora, composing and producing the song "Raptame." He also has a small participation as a writer and producer with Digital Farm Animals and Lil 'Eddie, on the song "Mamacita" by Jason Derulo and Farruko, under license from the Warner Music record label.
On October 25, 2019, Ocean composed the song "Dime Tú", song by Venezuelan alternative pop singer Maye and composed by Fernando Osorio. The next month, he participated in the first studio album of the Colombian musician, singer and composer, Mike Bahía entitled Navegando, with the song "Detente". In addition, participated in the album New Africa Nation by the Ghanaian-English recording artist Fuse ODG, with the song "Lazy Day", also involving the British singer-songwriter, Ed Sheeran.
In 2020, Ocean released another single entitled "Que Lo Que". In April, Danny released the song "Cuando Amanezca", in collaboration with the American singer and songwriter J Quiles, along with singer and composer, Salomón Villada Hoyos better known by his stage name as Feid and Nibal. In May 22, He also has a collaboration with rapper Lil Ackson, on the song "Your Voice". This song belongs to the rapper's album, titled "Lil Ackson VS. The World".
Then, during Summer 2020, Danny co-operated with producer Daniel Oviedo, better known as Ovy on the Drums to produce the tune "Ay DiOs mio!" from Colombian singer and songwriter of reggaeton, Latin pop and Latin trap, Carolina Giraldo Navarro, better known by her stage name Karol G, alongside helping with the songwriting.
On August 14 of this year, Danny releases the remix of 88rising, Midsummer Madness, which features the participation of the is a Japanese-Australian singer, songwriter, producer, ex-youtuber and comedian, George Kusunoki Miller, best known for his stage name Joji, Indonesian rapper Brian Imanuel Soewarno, known professionally as Rich Brian, singer, rapper and producer, August 08, Chinese hip-hop group "Higher Brothers" (made up of MaSiWei (马思 唯), DZknow (丁 震), Psy.P (杨俊逸) and Melo (谢宇杰)) and Nicole Zefanya, known professionally as Niki, where the latter, participate in the final chorus of the song.


== Personal life ==
Danny is not currently romantically involved, nor does he have any children.
His song "Me Rehúso" is dedicated to an ex-girlfriend, where both had to take different paths due to the situation in Venezuela.
In an interview with People en Español Magazine, Danny reveals to be a big fan of the Spanish singer-songwriter and winner of 24 Latin Grammys and 4 Grammys, Alejandro Sanz, where he wishes to one day make a collaboration with him. In addition, he mentions that he is fascinated by the voice of the Puerto Rican singer-songwriter and actor, Juan Carlos Ozuna Rosado, known simply as Ozuna.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== EPs ===
2009: 

Backstage (como Danny O.C.T.)2014:

Paracaídas (as Danny O.C.T)
Sin Intención (como Danny O.C.T.)2015:

U-YE (como Danny O.C.T.)
Pronto (como Danny O.C.T.)


=== Singles ===


=== Collaborations ===
 2016:

"Replay" (featuring DJ Katastraphy, Bri Nichole, Rello Muse & Philup Banks) 2018:

"Epa Wei" (produced by Skrillex) 2019:

"Looking For" (by Digital Farm Animals)
"Voodoo" with David Guetta, Stargate, Tiwa Savage & Wizkid (by Coldplay as Los Unidades)
"Raptame" by Reik (as composer and producer)
"Mamacita" by Jason Derulo and Farruko (as producer and writer beside Digital Farm Animals & Lil 'Eddie)
"Dime Tú" (with Maye and Fernando Osorio)
"Detente" (featuring Mike Bahía)
"Lazy Day" (by Fuse ODG Ft. Ed Sheeran)2020

"Cuando Amanezca" by Nibal (with J Quiles & Feid)
"Midsummer Madness 20" (Midsummer Madness Remix) by 88rising (with Joji, Rich Brian, August 08, Higher Brothers &  Niki)
“Miedito O Qué” (with Karol G & Ovy On The Drums)
“Ay, DiOs Mío!” By Karol G (As composer)2021

"Tú No Me Conoces" (with TINI)
“Milímetros” by Lagos (as composer)
“Mónaco” (with Lagos)
“Cámbiate el Nombre” By Lagos (as composer)
“Cuantas Veces” (with Justin Quiles)
“Machu Picchu” by Camilo Echeverry and Evaluna Montaner  (as composer)
“DVD” by Karol G (as composer)
“No Eres Tú Soy Yo” (with Maria Becerra )
“Picó” (with Yera, Blackie & Lois)Other singles

"Eres Tú La Musa" (Ft. ZsW ZeroSWar) as Danny O.C.T.
"Ese Lugar" (Ft. Oma) as Danny O.C.T.
"Demasiado Tarde" (Ft. KC Clan) as Danny O.C.T.
"Un Cigarro"
"Sunday Morning Driving"
"120 Kilómetros"
"Mueve Tu Cuerpo"
"OXES"
"Besarnos de Cero"


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==