Jazzmun (born February 10, 1969) is the stage name of Jazzmun Nichala Crayton who is an American actress and nightclub performer, often working in the Los Angeles Area.


== Background ==
Originally from San Diego, California, Jazzmun made her first national television appearance on the talent variety show Puttin' on the Hits in 1984, in which she split her body half in male drag and half in female drag, lip synching as a "duet."Finding work immediately after that appearance for her theatric and modeling talents, she moved to Los Angeles and secured an agent. Since then she has performed all over the world performing as either her stage character "Jazzmun"; her trademark Whitney Houston impersonation, which she performed as in the female stage revue La Cage; or any number of other characters. In the late 1990s Jazzmun co-starred in the stage play Ask Any Girl as the character Mahogany Saint Ross, a name play-on-words to singer Diana Ross.Latina singer Gloria Estefan hired Jazzmun to perform in the music video of her remake hit "Everlasting Love" after seeing one of Jazzmun's performances. Later, drag icon RuPaul hired Jazzmun to also perform in his music video "A Little Bit of Love" which spoofed drag queens as aliens out to conquer the world. Jazzmun then released two of her own dance singles in 1997 on the Aqua Boogie label: "I'm Gonna Let You Have It" and "That Sound, That Beat." Later she produced another hit "2 Tired 2 B Shady," which was later featured in Patrik-Ian Polk's show Noah's Arc.After many years as a female impersonator, Jazzmun announced (circa 2008) she is a transgender woman. She has stated, "It's not so much as a physical thing but mental and spiritual for me." Jazzmun has played several drag queen and transvestite characters in film and television. Her first role playing a transgender character on television came in 1997 on The Wayans Brothers.In 2017, Jazzmun participated in a filmed letter to Hollywood written by Jen Richards, produced by GLAAD and ScreenCrush, asking for more and improved roles for transgender people.


== Select film resume ==
Dreamgirls (2006) - Studio 54 Drag Queen
Wristcutters (film) A Love Story (2006) - Transvestite
The 40-Year-Old Virgin (2005) - Prostitute
Hellbent (2004) - Black Pepper
Punks (2000) - Chris/Crystal
Blast from the Past (1999) - Hooker
The Big Brass Ring (1999) - Little John John


== Select television resume ==
Big Shots - Dontrelle
Desperate Housewives - Transgender woman
CSI: Crime Scene Investigation - Mercedes
CSI: NY - Bambi
Nip/Tuck - Transgender Man
The John Larroquette Show - Pat/Patrick Drag Queen
The Shield - Frank Gilmore
Union Square - Drag Queen Doorman
NYPD Blue - Peaches
Roseanne - Diana Ross
ER - Drag Queen
The Cleaner - Tanya
The Closer - Nancy
The Wayans Bros - Albert/Alberta Transvestite
Sons of Anarchy - Transgender Drug Dealer
Gilmore Girls 2nd Season ep. 3 - Janet Jackson
When We Rise - Bobbi Jean Baker


== References ==


== External links ==
Jazzmun at IMDb
Official Site
Clip of Jazzmun's scene in Puff, Puff, Pass