Can Yaman (Turkish: [dʒan jaman]) (born 8 November 1989) is a Turkish actor, model and lawyer. He received a Golden Butterfly Award for Best Actor in a Romantic Comedy in 2018 for his role in Erkenci Kuş as well as Murex d'Or in 2019. In 2020, he received an international PRODU2020 nomination for his role in the series Mr. Wrong (Turkish: Bay Yanlış). Yaman starred in the TV shows Gönül İşleri, İnadına Aşk, Hangimiz Sevmedik, Dolunay. He also won the 7th GQ Men of the Year 2019 award.


== Life ==
Yaman was born on 8 November 1989 in Istanbul, Turkey. His paternal grandfather is Kosovo-Albanian from Kosovo. His paternal grandmother is Albanian from North Macedonia. He is the nephew of football coach Fuat Yaman. From an early age, Yaman's grandmothers were involved hands-on in his upbringing and care due to financial difficulties which his parents experienced. Yaman's parents divorced when he was five years old.Yaman studied at Bilfen Kolej for first and middle school, then studied at the Liceo Italiano di Istanbul, where he finished as a top student with the highest grade since existence of the educational establishment. Can Yaman speaks fluently 5 languages including italian and english. In 2012, he graduated from the Law Department of Yeditepe University, and began working at PricewaterhouseCoopers, where he met his current law firm partners. By the time he was 24, Yaman was working in mergers and acquisitions and writing articles for the tax section of Dunya newspaper. As he was finding success in the corporate law sector, he was also realizing that corporate life was not for him. Yaman told Hello! Magazine in 2018, "I felt like having an open view but sitting in an office and wearing a suit bothered me a lot. When they gave me an annual leave, I left without coming back. It was on TV that my colleagues saw me next." While on summer leave from work, Yaman travelled to Bodrum where he met his eventual and current acting managers, Cuneyt Sayil and Ilker Bilgi.In January 2021, Yaman moved from Turkey to Italy.


== Career ==
Can Yaman started his career in Gönül İşleri  in 2014. In 2015, he starred in İnadına Aşk and starred in Hangimiz Sevmedik in 2016. The breakthrough of his career came in 2017 with the series Dolunay.From 2018 to 2019, he played one of the lead roles "Can Divit” in the Turkish romantic comedy series Erkenci Kuş (Daydreamer) opposite Demet Özdemir. He received several acting awards and nominations including international award for this series.
Can Υaman played the lead role Özgür Atasoy in the Turkish short series Bay Yanlış (Mr. Wrong). The series is produced by Gold Film, directed by Deniz Yorulmazer, with a script by Aslı Zengin and Banu Zengin Tak. It premiered on FOX in June 2020. The series was cancelled due to low ratings in Turkey.
Can Yaman signed a contract to star as a lead in reebot of 80's cult series Sandokan.


== Filmography ==


== Awards ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Can Yaman at IMDb
Can Yaman on Instagram
www.canyaman.it/en/