Michael R. Jackson is an American playwright, composer, and lyricist. He is originally from Detroit, Michigan, and holds a BFA in Playwriting and an MFA in Musical Theatre Writing from NYU Tisch School of the Arts.


== Career ==
Jackson wrote the book and lyrics for Only Children with composer Rachel Peters, which was presented at NYU's Frederick Loewe Theatre. He also wrote lyrics and co-wrote the book, with Anna K. Jacobs, for the musical adaptation of the 2007 indie film Teeth. In 2019, his song cycle, The Kids on the Lawn, was published in The New York Times Magazine's culture issue. The issue, organized around the theme "America 2024", imagines what America will be like five years into the future. Jackson's musical, A Strange Loop, received its world premiere at Playwrights Horizons in New York City in 2019.


== Awards and recognition ==
In 2017, Jackson received a Jonathan Larson Grant from the American Theatre Wing and was one of 11 winners of the 2017 Lincoln Center Emerging Artist Award. He was also a Sundance Theatre Institute Composer Fellow and a 2016–2017 Dramatist Guild Fellow.Jackson was named one of the "Black Male Writers for our Time" by The New York Times in 2018. In 2019, he received a Whiting Award for drama and a Helen Merrill Award for Playwriting. In 2020, Jackson was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for A Strange Loop, becoming the first black musical theatre writer to win the award. He was also the winner of the Lambda Literary Award for Drama and a Fred Ebb Award for aspiring musical theatre songwriters. Additionally, Jackson received two Drama Desk Awards, two Obie Awards, two Outer Critics Circle Award Honors, and an Antonyo Award for Best Book for A Strange Loop.In June 2020, in honor of the 50th anniversary of the first LGBTQ Pride parade, Queerty named him among the fifty heroes "leading the nation toward equality, acceptance, and dignity for all people".In March 2021 Jackson was awarded the Windham–Campbell Literature Prize for drama.


== Personal life ==
Jackson studied at Cass Technical High School. He is openly gay.


== References ==