Noa Kirel (Hebrew: נועה קירל; born on April 10, 2001) is an Israeli singer, actress, and television host. She has won the MTV Europe Music Awards for best Israeli act between 2017 and 2020.


== Early life ==
Kirel was born in Ra'anana, Israel, to Israeli-born parents of both Ashkenazi Jewish (Austrian-Jewish) and Sephardic Jewish (Moroccan-Jewish) descent.  She is the youngest child of Amir and Ilana Kirel. She has two older brothers. Her father is the CEO of Glassco Glass, an imported-glass business headquartered at the Barkan industrial park. On her father's side, Kirel has relatives who were killed in the Holocaust.Her first name was Noya at birth, but after being diagnosed with a serious kidney illness when she was three months old, a rabbi suggested to her parents to alter her name to Noa, so she would be able to move ('Noa' also spells movement in Hebrew) as she grew. The rabbi also predicted that she would become a dancer.In March 2020, she was enlisted to the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), and serves in a military band.


== Music career ==
Kirel rose to fame when she appeared in the Pushers documentary series from HOT, which tracks parents who push their children to success in different areas, and featured Kirel and her father, who was financially supporting her entertainment career development. Kirel is managed in Israel by the agent Roberto Ben-Shoshan and co-managed by Sharona Nomder (Morse Artists) internationally.
In 2015 she performed her first song on YouTube named "Medabrim?". Following its success, that year she released another song called "Killer". The provocative video clip for the song caused a stir due to Kirel's young age. She released additional songs, which were featured on YouTube and played on various Israeli radio stations, including the songs "Yesh Be Ahava", which was the first song to enter the Galgalatz playlist, "Rak Ata", "Hatzi Meshuga", "Bye Lahofesh" and "Ten Li Siman". At the end of 2016, she won the award "Singer of the Year" at the children's elected ceremony. On February 26, 2017, Kirel began hosting the "Lipstar" musical program on kidZ channel, alongside Sagi Breitner. In May 2017, she released a song called "Makom Leshinuy" which she sang in a duet with Avior Melasa who even wrote and composed the song. Kirel released several other songs during the year which were all marketing singles: "Lirkod", "Kimeat Meforsemet", "Wow", "Mi Yiten Li Et Ha'Koach". On June 22, she starred in the teen movie Nearly Famous, alongside Omer Dror. In the same year, she also appeared in the theater production "The Three Musketeers" alongside Omer Dror. On August 28, Kirel released a single which she performed with Agam Bohbut, a cover version of Danny Sanderson's song; "Etzel Ha'Doda ve Ha'Dod", as part of a campaign for Bezeq. In November 2017, she represented Israel at the "MTV Europe Music Awards", in the "International Artist" category.
On January 1, 2018, began starring in the television series Kfula in the roles of Noa Kirel (herself) and Kitty Popper (Libby Omer); A blogger who writes anything that happens to her famous self. The series airs on the KidZ channel on yes and HOT. On February 18, she began participating in Israel's Got Talent as a judge. On March 25, 2018, she released the single "Megibor Le'Oyev". On May 1 of that year, the series "Shilton Ha'Tzlalim" has aired, where she plays the role of Basemet. On August 9, a theater production Kfula show starring Kirel and the stars of the Kfula series has opened in Menora Mivtachim Arena. On August 20, the theme song for the  #Freestyle Festigel production was released. In early September 2018, a full-length movie came out to promote the show. The show itself runs from November 13, 2018, to January 8, 2019. On September 5, Kirl featured in the song "Cinderella", of The Ultras. On September 20, Kirel collaborated with "Ma Kashur Trio" and Itai Levy, on a new cover version of Aric Sinai's "Siba Tova" song, "Hine Ze Ba", for a HOT campaign. In October, Kirel was selected for the second time to represent Israel at the MTV Europe Music Awards but was unable to attend the ceremony in Spain due to a tight schedule. That month, Kirel began to be the new cosmetic company "Keff" presenter. On November 2, she released the song "Zikaron Yashan" in collaboration with Israeli singer Jonathan Mergui, as part of the Festigel. On November 11, the cast of the 2018 Festigel, including Kirel, released the original song "Tinshom" with a video clip. On November 23, she participated in a tribute show in memory of Amir Fryszer Guttman called "As if there is no tomorrow" alongside many artists. In December 2018, Kirel led a campaign with the KidZ Channel and the Israeli National Road Safety Authority for wearing a helmet while cycling. In May 2020 she participated in a yes commercial. In November 2020, Kirel joined 39 other Israeli artists for charity single Katan Aleinu to support hospitals battling the COVID-19 pandemic.In June 2020, it was officially announced that Noa has signed a contract with the American label, Atlantic Records. In December of that year, Kirel signed with WME.In March 2021, it was announced that Kirel would star in a feature film produced by Picturestart. In May 2021, Kirel in collaboration with Israeli singer Omer Adam, released a remix version of the national anthem of the state of Israel, Hatikvah. The collaboration received a lot of criticism - with many calling it "disrespectful" and "embarrassing". In honor of Pride Month, Kirel and Israeli comedian Ilan Peled released the single "Trilili Tralala". the single won the status of a Gay anthem in Israel and reached number two on Media Forest's Israeli singles chart upon its release.
On July 14, 2021, she released her first international single, "Please Don't Suck". On October 15, 2021, she released the single "Bad Little Thing" which she also performed at the Miss Universe 2021 Ceremony.On January 12, 2022 she released the single "Thought About That".


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===


== Filmography ==


== See also ==
Music of Israel
Women of Israel


== References ==


== External links ==
Noa Kirel at IMDb