Sir Michael Philip Jagger (born 26 July 1943) is an English singer, songwriter, actor, and film producer who has achieved international fame as the lead vocalist and one of the founder members of the Rolling Stones. His songwriting partnership with Keith Richards is one of the most successful in history. Jagger's career has spanned over six decades, and he has been described as "one of the most popular and influential frontmen in the history of rock & roll". His distinctive voice and energetic live performances, along with Keith Richards' guitar style, have been the Rolling Stones's trademark throughout the band's career. Jagger gained press notoriety for his romantic involvements and was often portrayed as a countercultural figure.
Jagger was born and grew up in Dartford, Kent. He studied at the London School of Economics before abandoning his studies to join the Rolling Stones. Jagger has written most of the Rolling Stones' songs together with Richards, and they continue to collaborate musically. In the late 1960s, Jagger starred in the films Performance (1970) and Ned Kelly (1970) to a mixed reception. He began a solo career in 1985, releasing his first album, She's the Boss and joined the electric supergroup SuperHeavy in 2009. Relationships with the Stones' members, particularly Richards, deteriorated during the 1980s, but Jagger has always found more success with the band than with his solo and side projects. Jagger has been married and divorced once, and has had several other relationships, resulting in eight children with five women.
In 1989, Jagger was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and in 2004 into the UK Music Hall of Fame with the Rolling Stones. As a member of the Rolling Stones, and as a solo artist, he reached number one on the UK and US singles charts with 13 singles, the top 10 with 32 singles and the top 40 with 70 singles. In 2003, he was knighted for his services to popular music. Jagger's net worth has been estimated at $360 million.


== Early life ==
Michael Philip Jagger was born into a middle-class family in Dartford, Kent, on 26 July 1943. His father, Basil Fanshawe "Joe" Jagger (13 April 1913 – 11 November 2006), a former gymnast, was a physical education teacher who helped popularise basketball in Britain; his grandfather David Ernest Jagger was also a teacher. His mother, Eva Ensley Mary (née Scutts; 6 April 1913 – 18 May 2000), born in Sydney, Australia, of English descent, was a hairdresser and an active member of the Conservative Party. Jagger's younger brother, Chris (born 19 December 1947), is also a musician. The two have performed together.Although brought up to follow his father's career path, Jagger "was always a singer" as he said in According to the Rolling Stones. "I always sang as a child. I was one of those kids who just liked to sing. Some kids sing in choirs; others like to show off in front of the mirror. I was in the church choir and I also loved listening to singers on the radio – the BBC or Radio Luxembourg – or watching them on TV and in the movies."In September 1950, Keith Richards and Jagger were classmates at Wentworth Primary School, Dartford, before the Jagger family's 1954 move to Wilmington, Kent. The same year he passed the eleven-plus examination and attended Dartford Grammar School, which now has the Mick Jagger Centre, named after its most famous alumnus, installed within the school's site. Jagger and Richards lost contact with each other when they went to different schools, but after a chance encounter on platform two at Dartford railway station in July 1960, resumed their friendship and discovered their shared love of rhythm and blues, which for Jagger had begun with Little Richard.Jagger left school in 1961 after passing seven O-levels and two A-levels. He and Richards moved into a flat in Edith Grove, Chelsea, London, with guitarist Brian Jones. While Richards and Jones planned to start their own rhythm and blues group, Blues Incorporated, Jagger continued to study finance and accounting on a government grant as an undergraduate student at the London School of Economics. He had seriously considered becoming either a journalist or a politician, comparing the latter to a pop star.Brian Jones, using the name Elmo Lewis, began working at the Ealing Club – where a "loosely knit version" of Blues Incorporated began with Richards. Jagger began to jam with the group, eventually becoming the featured singer. Soon, Richards, Jones, and Jagger practised on their own, laying the foundation for what would become the Rolling Stones.


== The Rolling Stones ==


=== 1960s ===

In their earliest days, the Rolling Stones played for no money in the interval of Alexis Korner's gigs at a basement club opposite London's Ealing Broadway tube station (subsequently called "Ferry's" club). The group had very little equipment and borrowed Korner's gear to play. The group's first appearance, under the name the Rollin' Stones (after one of their favourite Muddy Waters tunes), was at the Marquee Club, a London jazz club, on 12 July 1962. They would later change their name to "the Rolling Stones" as it seemed more formal. Writer Victor Bockris says the band members included Jagger, Keith Richards, Brian Jones, Ian Stewart on piano, Dick Taylor on bass and Tony Chapman on drums. However, Richards says in his memoir Life that "The drummer that night was Mick Avory–not Tony Chapman, as history has mysteriously handed it down..." By autumn 1963, Jagger had left the London School of Economics to pursue his promising musical career with the Rolling Stones. The group played songs by American rhythm and blues artists like Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley, but strongly encouraged by manager Andrew Loog Oldham, Jagger and Richards soon began to write songs. Their songwriting partnership took some time to develop; one of their early compositions was "As Tears Go By", a song written for Marianne Faithfull, a young singer Loog Oldham was promoting.  For the Rolling Stones, the duo would write "The Last Time", the group's third number one single in the UK (their first two UK number one hits being remakes of songs that had been recorded by other artists "It's All Over Now" by Bobby Womack and "Little Red Rooster" by Willie Dixon) based on "This May Be the Last Time", a traditional Negro spiritual song recorded by the Staple Singers in 1955. Jagger and Richards also wrote their first international hit, "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction". It established the Rolling Stones' image as defiant troublemakers in contrast to the Beatles as "lovable moptop[s]". Jagger told Stephen Schiff in a 1992 Vanity Fair profile: I wasn't trying to be rebellious in those days; I was just being me. I wasn't trying to push the edge of anything. I'm being me and ordinary, the guy from suburbia who sings in this band, but someone older might have thought it was just the most awful racket, the most terrible thing, and where are we going if this is music?... But all those songs we sang were pretty tame, really. People didn't think they were, but I thought they were tame.
The group released several successful albums, including Out of Our Heads, Aftermath, and Between the Buttons. In their personal lives, their behaviour was questioned. In 1967, Jagger and Richards were arrested on drug charges and were given unusually harsh sentences. Jagger was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for possession of four over-the-counter pep pills he had purchased in Italy and Richards was sentenced to one year in prison for allowing cannabis to be smoked on his property. The traditionally conservative editor of The Times, William Rees-Mogg, wrote an article critical of the sentences; and on appeal, Richards' sentence was overturned and Jagger's was amended to a conditional discharge (although he ended up spending one night in London's Brixton Prison). The Rolling Stones continued to face legal battles for the next decade.By the release of the Stones' album Beggars Banquet, Brian Jones was contributing only sporadically to the band. Jagger said Jones was "not psychologically suited to this way of life". His drug use had become a hindrance, and he could not obtain a US visa. Richards reported that in a June meeting with Jagger, Richards and Watts at Jones' house, Jones admitted he was unable to "go on the road again", and left the band, saying  "I've left, and if I want to I can come back". On 3 July 1969, less than a month later, Jones drowned under mysterious circumstances in the swimming pool at his home, Cotchford Farm, in Hartfield, East Sussex.On 5 July 1969, two days after Jones' death, the Rolling Stones played a previously scheduled show at Hyde Park, dedicating it as a tribute to him. In front of an estimated 250,000 fans, the Stones performed their first gig with their new guitarist, Mick Taylor. At the beginning of the show, Jagger read an excerpt from Shelley's poem Adonaïs, an elegy written on the death of his friend John Keats, after which they released thousands of butterflies in Jones' memory before starting the show with a song by Johnny Winter, "I'm Yours and I'm Hers". During the concert, they included two never before heard songs from two forthcoming albums, "Midnight Rambler", "Love in Vain" from Let It Bleed,  released in December 1969, and  "Loving Cup", which appeared on Exile on Main St., released May 1972. The band also played "Honky Tonk Women", released the previous day.


=== 1970s ===

In 1970, Jagger bought Stargroves, a manor house and estate near East Woodhay in Hampshire. The Rolling Stones and several other bands recorded there using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio. 1970 saw the cinematic release of Nicholas Roeg's controversial film Performance, produced in 1968, featuring Jagger as a reclusive rock star, Turner. Keith Richard's girlfriend Anita Pallenberg also appears in the film.Jagger and the rest of the band moved to the south of France as tax exiles in 1971 to avoid paying a 93 percent supertax imposed by Prime Minister Harold Wilson's Labour government on the county's top earners. Along with the rest of the band, Jagger changed his look and style as the 1970s progressed. There, he learned to play guitar and contributed guitar parts for songs on Sticky Fingers (1971) and the Stones' subsequent albums except Dirty Work in 1986. For the Rolling Stones' highly publicised 1972 American tour, Jagger wore glam-rock clothing and glitter makeup on stage. Jagger was the principal creative force behind the band's venture into disco and punk on their album, Some Girls (1978). However, their interest in the blues had been made manifest on the 1972 album Exile on Main St.. Music critic Russell Hall has described Jagger's emotional singing on the gospel-influenced "Let It Loose", from Exile as the singer's finest-ever vocal achievement.After the band's acrimonious split with their second manager, Allen Klein, in 1971, Jagger took control of their business affairs after speaking with an up-and-coming frontman, J. B. Silver, and has managed them ever since in collaboration with his friend and colleague, Prince Rupert Loewenstein. Mick Taylor, Jones' replacement, left the band in December 1974 and Faces guitarist Ronnie Wood replaced him in 1975. He has functioned as a mediator within the group, and between Jagger and Richards in particular.In 1972, Mick Jagger, Charlie Watts and Bill Wyman with Nicky Hopkins and Ry Cooder, released the album Jamming with Edward!, which was recorded during the Let It Bleed sessions at London's Olympic Studios. The album includes loose jams while the rest of the Stones (reportedly) were waiting for Keith Richards to return to the studio having left because of an issue over Cooder's supporting guitar role.


=== 1980s ===

While continuing to tour and release albums with the Rolling Stones, Jagger began a solo career. According to Rolling Stone, he did so to "establish an artistic identity for himself apart from the Rolling Stones"...his "boldest attempt yet". Jagger started writing and recording material for his first solo album She's the Boss. Released on 19 February 1985, the album, produced by Nile Rodgers and Bill Laswell, features Herbie Hancock, Jeff Beck, Jan Hammer, Pete Townshend and the Compass Point All Stars. It sold well, and the single "Just Another Night" was a Top Ten hit. During this period, he collaborated with the Jacksons on the song "State of Shock", sharing lead vocals with Michael Jackson.
Jagger performed without the Stones for the Live Aid multi-venue charity concert in 1985. He performed at Philadelphia's JFK Stadium, including a duet with Tina Turner of "It's Only Rock and Roll" (which was highlighted by Jagger tearing away Turner's skirt) and a cover of "Dancing in the Street" with David Bowie, who was performing at Wembley Stadium, London. The video was shown simultaneously on the screens of both Wembley and JFK Stadiums. The song reached number one in the UK the same year. The Stones released Dirty Work in March 1986, but Jagger refused to tour to support it. Richards referred to this period as "World War Three", saying if Jagger toured without the Stones, it would be a "death sentence". For his part, Jagger claimed: I think that one ought to be allowed to have one’s artistic side apart from just being in the Rolling Stones. I love the Rolling Stones — I think it’s wonderful, I think it’s done a lot of wonderful things for music. But, you know, it cannot be, at my age and after spending all these years, the only thing in my life.
He released his second solo album, Primitive Cool, in 1987. While it failed to match the commercial success of his debut, it was critically well received. Richards released his first solo album, Talk is Cheap, shortly afterwards. Many felt this marked the Stone's obituary. Jagger produced the songs "Glamour Boys" and "Which Way to America" on Living Colour's album Vivid in 1988. Between 15 and 28 March, he did a solo concert tour in Japan (Tokyo, Nagoya and Osaka).
Jagger and Richards reunited in the Barbados in 1988 and produced dozens of songs. Richards recalls:We just started in. And within two days, we realized we had five or six songs happening. I did have to take Mick to a few discos -- which are not my favorite places in the world -- because Mick likes to go out and dance at night. So I did that. That was my sacrifice. I humored him. And that's when I knew we could work together.
Ron Wood believes the modest sales of Jagger's Primitive Cool "surprised" Mick and made him "realize the strength of the band". Richards recalled: "We've been stuffed together for years and one of the consequences of the break was making us realize we were stuck together whether we liked it or not. Jagger agreed, saying: "Because we've been doing it for so long, we don't really have to discuss it. When we come up with a lick or a riff or a chorus, we already know if it's right or if it's wrong." On 29 August 1989 this work was revealed on the band's 21st U.S. album Steel Wheels.


=== 1990s ===
Following the success of Steel Wheels, and the end of Jagger and Richards' well-publicised feud, Jagger attempted to re-establish himself as a solo artist. He acquired Rick Rubin as co-producer in January 1992 for what would become his third solo album, Wandering Spirit. Sessions for the album began the same month in Los Angeles ending in September 1992. Richards was making his second solo studio album, Main Offender at the same time. On Wandering Spirit, Jagger kept celebrity guests to a minimum, having only Lenny Kravitz as a vocalist on his cover of Bill Withers' "Use Me" and bassist Flea from Red Hot Chili Peppers on three separate tracks. Jagger signed with Atlantic Records to distribute the record (which had signed the Stones in the 1970s). Wandering Spirit was his only solo release with the label, with the exception of The Very Best of Mick Jagger—a compilation album containing no new material. Released in February 1993, Wandering Spirit was commercially successful, reaching number 12 in the UK and number 11 in the US.


=== 2000s ===

In 2001, Jagger released his fourth solo album, Goddess in the Doorway, spawning the single "Visions of Paradise", which reached number 43 for one week. Following the 11 September attacks, Jagger joined Keith Richards in the Concert for New York City, a benefit concert in response to the terrorist attack, to sing "Salt of the Earth" and "Miss You".According to Fortune, from 1989 to 2001, the Stones generated more than US$1.5 billion in total gross revenue, exceeding that of U2, Bruce Springsteen, or Michael Jackson. Jagger celebrated the Rolling Stones' 40th anniversary by touring with the band on the year-long Licks Tour, supporting their commercially successful career retrospective Forty Licks double album. In 2007, the band grossed US$437 million on their A Bigger Bang Tour, which earned them an entry in the 2007 edition of Guinness World Records for the most lucrative music tour. When asked if the band would retire after the tour, Jagger said "I'm sure the Rolling Stones will do more things and more records and more tours. We've got no plans to stop any of that really."Two years later in October 2009, Jagger joined U2 on stage to perform "Gimme Shelter" (with Fergie and will.i.am) and "Stuck in a Moment You Can't Get Out Of" with U2 at the 25th Anniversary Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Concert.


=== 2010s ===

On 20 May 2011, Jagger announced the formation of a new supergroup, SuperHeavy, which included Dave Stewart, Joss Stone, Damian Marley and A.R. Rahman. The group started with a phone call Jagger received from Stewart. Stewart had heard three sound systems playing different music at the same time in his home in St Ann's Bay, Jamaica. This gave him the idea of creating a group with Jagger, fusing the musical styles of various artists. After multiple phone calls and deliberation, the other members of the group were decided upon. SuperHeavy released one album and two singles in 2011, reportedly recording 29 songs in ten days. Jagger is featured on will.i.am's 2011 single "T.H.E. (The Hardest Ever)" along with Jennifer Lopez, officially released to iTunes on 4 February 2012.On 21 February 2012, Jagger, B.B. King, Buddy Guy and Jeff Beck, and a blues ensemble, performed at the White House concert series before President Barack Obama. When Jagger held out a mic to him, Obama twice sang the line "Come on, baby don't you want to go" of the blues cover "Sweet Home Chicago," the blues anthem of Obama's hometown. Jagger hosted the season finale of Saturday Night Live on 19 and 20 May 2012, doing several comic skits and playing some Rolling Stones' hits with Arcade Fire, Foo Fighters and Jeff Beck.Jagger performed in 12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief with the Rolling Stones on 12 December 2012. The Stones finally played the Glastonbury festival in 2013, headlining on Saturday, 29 June. This was followed by two concerts in London's Hyde Park as part of their 50th anniversary celebrations, their first in the Park since their famous 1969 performance. In 2013, Jagger teamed up with his brother Chris Jagger for two new duets on his album Concertina Jack, released to mark the 40th anniversary of his debut album. In July 2017, Jagger released the double A-sided single "Gotta Get a Grip" / "England Lost". They were released as a response to the "anxiety, unknowability of the changing political situation" in a post-Brexit UK, according to Jagger. Accompanying music videos were released for both songs.In March 2019, a Rolling Stones tour of the U.S. and Canada from April to June, had to be postponed as Jagger needed medical treatment for a then undisclosed condition, which was later revealed to be a Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR) procedure. On 4 April 2019, it was announced that Jagger had successfully undergone the procedure at NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital, and was in great health. After a six-week delay while Jagger recovered, the No Filter Tour resumed with two performances at Chicago's Soldier Field.


== Relationship with Keith Richards ==

His songwriting partnership with Keith Richards is one of the most successful in history. However, his relationship with Richards is frequently described as "love/hate" by the media. Richards said in a 1998 interview: "I think of our differences as a family squabble. If I shout and scream at him, it's because no one else has the guts to do it or else they're paid not to do it. At the same time I'd hope Mick realises that I'm a friend who is just trying to bring him into line and do what needs to be done."The Rolling Stones album Dirty Work (UK & US number four) was released in March 1986 to mixed reviews, despite the US top five hit "Harlem Shuffle". With relations between Richards and Jagger at a low, Jagger refused to tour to promote the album, and instead undertook his own solo tour, which included Rolling Stones' songs. Richards has referred to this period in his relations with Jagger as "World War III". As a result of the animosity within the band at this time, they almost broke up. Jagger's solo records, She's the Boss (UK number 6; US number 13) (1985) and Primitive Cool (UK number 26; US number 41) (1987), met with moderate success, and in 1988, with the Rolling Stones mostly inactive, Richards released his first solo album, Talk Is Cheap (UK number 37; US number 24). It was well received by fans and critics, going gold in the US. The following year 25×5: the Continuing Adventures of the Rolling Stones, a documentary spanning the career of the band was released for their 25th anniversary.Richards' autobiography, Life, was published on 26 October 2010. According to a 15 October 2010 article, Richards described Jagger as "unbearable", noting that their relationship had been strained "for decades". By 2015, Richards' opinion had softened. While calling Jagger a "snob"  he added "I still love him dearly ... your friends don't have to be perfect."


== Acting and film production ==
Jagger has had an intermittent acting career. His most significant role was in Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg's Performance (1968), and as Australian bushranger Ned Kelly in the film of the same name (1970). He composed an improvised soundtrack for Kenneth Anger's film Invocation of My Demon Brother on the Moog synthesiser in 1969.Jagger auditioned for the role of Dr. Frank N. Furter in the 1975 film adaptation of The Rocky Horror Show, a role that was eventually played by Tim Curry, the original performer from its theatrical run in London's West End. Director Alejandro Jodorowsky approached him in the same year to play the role of Feyd-Rautha in his proposed adaptation of Frank Herbert's Dune, but the movie never made it to the screen. Jagger appeared as himself in the Rutles' film All You Need Is Cash (1978) and was cast as Wilbur, a main character in Werner Herzog's Fitzcarraldo, in the late 1970s. However, the illness of principal actor Jason Robards (later replaced by Klaus Kinski), and a delay in the film's notoriously difficult production, resulted in him being unable to continue because schedule conflicts with a Stones' tour; some footage of Jagger's work is shown in the documentaries Burden of Dreams and My Best Fiend. Jagger developed a reputation for playing the heavy later in his acting career in films including Freejack (1992), Bent (1997), and The Man From Elysian Fields (2002).In 1995, Jagger founded Jagged Films with Victoria Pearman. Jagged Films' first release was the World War II drama Enigma (2001), starring Kate Winslet as one of Bletchley Park's Enigma codebreakers. That same year, Jagged Films produced a documentary about Jagger entitled Being Mick. The programme, which first aired in the US on ABC on 22 November, coincided with the release of his fourth solo album, Goddess in the Doorway. In 2008 the company began work on The Women, an adaptation of the George Cukor's film of the same name, directed by Diane English.

As a member of The Rolling Stones Jagger appears in numerous documentaries, including Gimme Shelter, filmed during the band's 1969 tour of the US, and Sympathy for the Devil (1968) directed by French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard. Martin Scorsese worked with Jagger on Shine a Light, a documentary film featuring the band with footage from the A Bigger Bang Tour during two nights of performances at New York's Beacon Theatre. It screened in Berlin in February 2008. McCarthy predicted the film would fare better once released to video than in its limited theatrical runs. (Unnecessary detail imo) Jagger was a co-producer of, and guest-starred in the first episode of the short-lived American comedy television series The Knights of Prosperity. He also co-produced the James Brown biopic Get On Up (2014). Alongside Martin Scorsese, Rich Cohen and Terence Winter, Jagger co-created and executive produced the period drama series Vinyl (2016), which starred Bobby Cannavale and aired for one season on HBO before its cancellation. Keith Richards and Johnny Depp tried unsuccessfully to persuade Jagger to appear with them in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011).Jagger portrays an English art dealer-collector and patron in Giuseppe Capotondi's thriller The Burnt Orange Heresy (2020).


== Personal life ==


=== Relationships ===
Jagger has been married and divorced once, and has had other relationships.
Jagger dated Chrissie Shrimpton between 1963 and 1966. From 1966 to 1970, he had a relationship with Marianne Faithfull, the English singer-songwriter/actress with whom he wrote "Sister Morphine," a song on the Rolling Stones' 1971 album Sticky Fingers. He pursued a relationship with Marsha Hunt from 1969 to 1970. Jagger met the American singer and, though Hunt was married, the pair began a relationship in 1969. The relationship ended in June 1970, when Hunt was pregnant with Jagger's first child, Karis Hunt Jagger, born on 4 November 1970. Hunt is the inspiration for the song "Brown Sugar", also from Sticky Fingers.In 1970, he met Nicaraguan-born Bianca Pérez-Mora Macias. They married on 12 May 1971 in a Catholic ceremony in Saint-Tropez, France. Their daughter, Jade Sheena Jezebel Jagger, was born on 21 October 1971.  They separated in 1977, and in May 1978 she filed for divorce on the grounds of his adultery. During his marriage to Pérez-Mora Macias, Jagger had an affair with then-Playboy model Bebe Buell from 1974 to 1976.In late 1977, Jagger began dating American model Jerry Hall. They had unofficial private marriage ceremony in Bali, Indonesia, on 21 November 1990, and lived at Downe House in Richmond, London. The couple had four children: Elizabeth 'Lizzie' Scarlett Jagger (born 2 March 1984), James Leroy Augustin Jagger (born 28 August 1985), Georgia May Ayeesha Jagger (born 12 January 1992), and Gabriel Luke Beauregard Jagger (born 9 December 1997). During his relationship with Hall, Jagger had an affair with Italian singer/model Carla Bruni, from 1991 to 1994. She became the First Lady of France when she married then-President of France Nicolas Sarkozy in 2008. Jagger's relationship with Hall ended after she discovered that he had had an affair with Brazilian model Luciana Gimenez, who gave birth to Jagger's seventh child, Lucas Maurice Morad Jagger, on 18 May 1999. Jagger's unofficial marriage to Hall was declared invalid, unlawful, and null and void by the High Court of England and Wales in London in 1999. Jagger's subsequent relationship was 2000 to 2001 with the English model Sophie Dahl.Jagger was in a relationship with fashion designer L'Wren Scott from 2001 until her suicide in 2014. She left her entire estate, estimated at US$9 million, to him. Jagger set up the L'Wren Scott scholarship at London's Central Saint Martins College.Since Scott died in 2014, Jagger has been in a relationship with American ballet dancer Melanie Hamrick. Jagger was 73 when Hamrick gave birth to their son Deveraux Octavian Basil Jagger on 8 December 2016.


=== Family ===
Jagger's father, Basil "Joe" Jagger, died of pneumonia on 11 November 2006 at age 93. Although the Rolling Stones were on the A Bigger Bang tour, Jagger flew to Britain to see his father before returning the same day to Las Vegas, where he was to perform that night, after being informed his father's condition was improving. The show went ahead as scheduled, despite Jagger learning of his father's death that afternoon. Jagger's friends said that the show going on was "what Joe would have wanted". Jagger called his father the "greatest influence" in his life.


== Interests and philanthropy ==

Jagger is a supporter of music in schools, a patron of The Mick Jagger Centre in Dartford, and sponsors music through his Red Rooster Programme in its local schools. The Red Rooster name is taken from the title of one of the Rolling Stones' earliest singles.An avid cricket fan, Jagger founded Jagged Internetworks to cover the sport. He keenly follows the England national football team, and has regularly attended FIFA World Cup games.


== Honours ==
Jagger was honoured with a knighthood for services to popular music in the Queen's 2002 Birthday Honours, and on 12 December 2003 he received the accolade from The Prince of Wales. Jagger's father and daughters Karis and Elizabeth were in attendance. Jagger stated that while the award did not have significant meaning for him, he was "touched" by the significance that it held for his father, saying that his father "was very proud".In 2014, the Jaggermeryx naida ("Jagger's water nymph"), a 19-million-year-old species of 'long-legged pig', was named after Jagger. Jaw fragments of the long-extinct anthracotheres were discovered in Egypt. The trilobite species Aegrotocatellus jaggeri was also named after Jagger.


== In popular culture ==

From the time that the Rolling Stones developed their anti-establishment image in the mid-1960s, Jagger, with Richards, has been an enduring icon of the counterculture. This was enhanced by his drug-related arrests, sexually charged on-stage antics, provocative song lyrics, and his role in Performance. One of his biographers, Christopher Andersen, describes him as "one of the dominant cultural figures of our time," adding that Jagger was "the story of a generation". Jagger, who at the time described himself as an anarchist and espoused the leftist slogans of the era, took part in a demonstration against the Vietnam War outside the US Embassy in London in 1968. This event inspired him to write "Street Fighting Man" that same year.

In 1967, Cecil Beaton photographed Jagger's naked buttocks, a photo that sold at Sotheby's auction house in 1986 for $4,000.
Jagger was reported to be a contender for the anonymous subject of Carly Simon's 1973 hit song "You're So Vain", on which he sings backing vocals.Pop artist Andy Warhol painted a series of silkscreen portraits of Jagger in 1975, one of which was owned by Farah Diba, wife of the Shah of Iran. It hung on a wall inside the royal palace in Tehran.
In 2010, a retrospective exhibition of portraits of Jagger was presented at the festival Rencontres d'Arles, in France. The catalogue of the exhibition is the first photo album of Jagger and shows his evolution over 50 years.Maroon 5's song "Moves like Jagger" is about Jagger, who acknowledged the song in an interview, calling the concept "very flattering". Kesha's song "Tik Tok", the Black Eyed Peas' hit "The Time (Dirty Bit)" reference Jagger, and his vocal delivery is referenced by rapper Ghostface Killah in his song "The Champ", from his 2006 album Fishscale, which was later referenced by Kanye West in the 2008 T.I. and Jay-Z single "Swagga Like Us".On television, the ITV satirical puppet show Spitting Image caricaturised Jagger as perpetually high throughout its run in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1998, the MTV animated show Celebrity Deathmatch had a clay-animated fight to the death between Jagger and Aerosmith lead singer Steven Tyler. Jagger wins the fight by using his tongue to stab Tyler through the chest. The 2000 film Almost Famous, set in 1973, refers to Jagger: "Because if you think Mick Jagger'll still be out there, trying to be a rock star at age 50 ... you're sadly, sadly mistaken."In 2012, Jagger was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover – to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires.


== Legacy ==

In the words of British dramatist and novelist Philip Norman, "the only point concerning Mick Jagger's influence over 'young people' that doctors and psychologists agreed on was that it wasn't, under any circumstances, fundamentally harmless". According to Norman, even Elvis Presley at his most scandalous had not exerted a "power so wholly and disturbingly physical". "[W]hile [Presley] made girls scream, [he] did not have Jagger's ability to make men feel uncomfortable." Norman likens Jagger in his early performances with the Rolling Stones in the 1960s to a male ballet dancer, with "his conflicting and colliding sexuality: the swan's neck and smeared harlot eyes allied to an overstuffed and straining codpiece".His performance style has been studied by academics who analysed gender, image and sexuality. Musicologist Sheila Whiteley noted that Jagger's performance style "opened up definitions of gendered masculinity and so laid the foundations for self-invention and sexual plasticity which are now an integral part of contemporary youth culture". His stage personas also contributed significantly to the British tradition of popular music that always featured the character song and where the art of singing becomes a matter of acting—which creates a question about the singer's relationship to his own words. His voice has been described as a powerful expressive tool for communicating feelings to his audience, and expressing an alternative vision of society. To express "virility and unrestrained passion" he developed techniques previously used by African American preachers and gospel singers such as "the roar, the guttural belt style of singing, and the buzz, a more nasal and raspy sound". Steven Van Zandt wrote: "The acceptance of Jagger's voice on pop radio was a turning point in rock & roll. He broke open the door for everyone else. Suddenly, Eric Burdon and Van Morrison weren't so weird – even Bob Dylan."AllMusic and MSN have described Jagger "one of the most popular and influential frontmen in the history of rock & roll", with Billboard sharing a similar sentiment calling him "the rock and roll frontman". Musician David Bowie joined many rock bands with blues, folk and soul orientations in his first attempts as a musician in the mid-1960s, and he was to recall: "I used to dream of being their Mick Jagger." Bowie  suggested, "I think Mick Jagger would be astounded and amazed if he realized that to many people he is not a sex symbol, but a mother image." Jagger appeared on Rolling Stone's List of 100 Greatest Singers at number 16; in the article, Lenny Kravitz wrote: "I sometimes talk to people who sing perfectly in a technical sense who don't understand Mick Jagger. [...] His sense of pitch and melody is really sophisticated. His vocals are stunning, flawless in their own kind of perfection." This edition also cites Jagger as a key influence on Jack White, Steven Tyler and Iggy Pop.More recently, his cultural legacy is associated with his ageing and continued vitality. Bon Jovi frontman Jon Bon Jovi said: "We continue to make Number One records and fill stadiums. But will we still be doing 150 shows per tour? I just can't see it. I don't know how the hell Mick Jagger does it at 67. That would be the first question I'd ask him. He runs around the stage as much as I do yet he's got almost 20 years on me." Since his early career Jagger has embodied what some authors describe as a "Dionysian archetype" of "eternal youth" personified by many rock stars and the rock culture.Jagger has repeatedly said that he will not write an autobiography. However, according to journalist John Blake, coauthor of the book Up and Down with the Rolling Stones, in the early 1980s, after a slew of unauthorised biographies, Jagger was persuaded by Lord Weidenfeld to prepare his own, for a £1 million advance. The resulting 75,000-word manuscript is held by Blake, who, he says, was briefly on track to publish it, until Jagger withdrew support."Mick Jagger is the least egotistical person," observed bandmate Charlie Watts in 2008. "He'll do what's right for the band. He's not a big head – and, if he was, he went through it thirty years ago."


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===


=== Compilation ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Singles ===


== Filmography ==
Jagger has appeared in the following films:

Jagger was slated to appear in the 1982 film Fitzcarraldo and some scenes were shot with him, but he had to leave for a Rolling Stones tour and his character was eliminated.


=== As producer ===
Running Out of Luck (1987)
Enigma (2001)
Being Mick (2001)
The Women (2008)
Get on Up (2014)
Mr. Dynamite: The Rise of James Brown (2014)
Vinyl (2016)


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Sources ===


== External links ==
Official website
Mick Jagger at IMDb
Mick Jagger on Twitter
Mick Jagger on Facebook
Mick Jagger at AllMusic
Mick Jagger on Instagram
Mick Jagger   on Charlie Rose
Sir Michael Philip ('Mick') Jagger (1943–), Singer and composer: Sitter associated with 33 portraits (National Portrait Gallery)
Mick Jagger Joins a New ABC Sitcom
1983 Audio interview with Mick Jagger-discusses Undercover album Classic Rock Central
Mick Jagger interviewed on the Pop Chronicles (1969)