Leila Isabel van Eimeren–Alcasid (born 16 October 1997) is a Filipino-Australian singer-songwriter, actress, and model based in the Philippines who recently launched her debut single entitled Completely in Love. She is currently a contract artist under Star Magic and Star Music.


== Early years ==
Born in the Philippines to veteran Filipino singer, songwriter, and actor Ogie Alcasid and 1994 Miss Universe Australia Michelle van Eimeren, Alcasid is the eldest among three siblings: sister Sarah born as well to van Eimeren in Ogie's first marriage, and brother Nate born to Filipino singer and actress Regine Velasquez-Alcasid in Ogie's second marriage.
Alcasid spent her early childhood in the Philippines until moving to Australia when she was five years old. She attended elementary school in St. Paul's Primary School and secondary school in Chevalier College and is reported to have always had an affinity for music. Into her first year in college in the University of Sydney, she had a deeper desire to get into singing and song-writing, which set the stage for her move to the Philippines.


== Career ==
In early 2017, Alcasid moved back to the Philippines, wanting to take her music career more seriously under the guidance of her father Ogie. She and her dad started composing music together, and Alcasid began taking Filipino language lessons, to better connect with her fans and grow deeper in her Filipino roots. Her dad Ogie also took on the role of Leila's talent manager.The media quickly took notice of Alcasid's return, and was announced to be part of ABS CBN's 2018 Star Circle along with other young up-and-coming stars.In January 2018, Star Music made its official announcement that it had signed Alcasid under its label, and Alcasid's debut single, Completely in Love was launched on February 23, which earned positive media reviews. The official music video was launched on Myx Philippines and Star Music's YouTube channel on April 18, 2018.
Currently, Alcasid is reported to be working on more new music and has expressed a desire to collaborate with other OPM artists.


== Personal life ==
Upon her 2017 move to the Philippines, Alcasid gained a massive Instagram following.Alcasid is reported to have always been open and comfortable with her modern family setup, as her mother Michelle van Eimeren had always maintained close friendships with both Ogie and Regine. Alcasid is very close with her stepmother, Regine, and her brother, Nate, while keeping constant communication with her mother's side of the family who are based in Sydney. She currently resides with Ogie, Regine and Nate in Metro Manila as she pursues her career in the Philippines.


== References ==