Ari'el Stachel (born July 29, 1991) is an American actor. He won the 2018 Tony Award for Featured Actor in a Musical for his role in The Band's Visit.


== Early life ==
Stachel was born and raised in Berkeley, California. His father, the son of Yemenite Jewish immigrants, grew up in Israel; his mother, Laura Stachel, is an Ashkenazi Jew from New York. The two met on a kibbutz. Stachel has said that while growing up, he was uncomfortable with his ethnic heritage. His parents divorced when he was young, and he adopted his mother's last name in part to avoid being associated with his father's Middle Eastern background. He was in fifth grade when the 9/11 terror attacks occurred, and rather than be identified as part Arab, he told friends he was half black.Stachel had his first role in a school musical at age 15, after which he left Berkeley High School to attend the Oakland School for the Arts. He went on to study drama at the NYU Tisch School of the Arts.


== Career ==
Following graduation, Stachel landed several stage roles and appeared on the CBS drama Blue Bloods and the Netflix series Jessica Jones before reading the script for The Band's Visit. He auditioned seven times over nine months before landing the role, for which he received Lortel Award and Drama Desk Award nominations before winning the Tony Award. In an emotional acceptance speech, Stachel thanked his parents, acknowledging his long struggle to accept his heritage, and expressed his joy at being part of a generation able to represent Middle Easterners in a positive fashion. "I want any kid that's watching to know that your biggest obstacle may turn into your purpose", he said. In 2019, Stachel began starring in the LGBTQ+ fantasy podcast The Two Princes as Prince Amir.In 2020, Stachel became a recurring cast member on Law & Order: SVU as Sergeant Hasim Khaldun.Stachel appeared 2021 film Zola as Sean, the title character's fiancé.In 2020, Stachel was set to appear in a starring role alongside David Hyde Pierce in The Public Theater's new musical adaptation of the 2007 film The Visitor. Stachel, who has Yemeni and Ashkenazi Jewish roots, was cast to play the character of Tarek, an undocumented Syrian refugee. Stachel publicly talked about his frustration over his character’s accent. During an interview with Playbill, Stachel stated his intent to “speak English without any hint that [his character] was not raised in the United States,” unlike in the original film. Due to COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns, the show’s Off-Broadway premiere was postponed. A few weeks into lockdowns, The Public Theater released a video of a musical number from the show that featured lead vocals from Stachel. By October 2021, the show was set to return to the stage for its official opening. However, a few days before previews were slated to begin, the show was delayed to address depictions of race and Arab-American representation. A few days later, it was announced that Stachel and The Public Theater's leadership had made a “mutual decision” that Stachel would depart the production. Stachel was replaced by his understudy, Ahmad Maksoud.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Ari'el Stachel at IMDb
Official website