Lathan Moses Stanley Echols (born January 25, 2002), known professionally as Lil Mosey, is an American rapper. He rose to fame in late 2017 with the release of his single "Pull Up". Mosey's debut studio album Northsbest (2018) included his first Billboard Hot 100 charting single, "Noticed". His second studio album, Certified Hitmaker (2019), peaked at number 12 on the US Billboard 200. In 2020, Mosey released the highest-charting single of his career, "Blueberry Faygo", which peaked at number 8 on the Billboard Hot 100.
In April 2021, Echols was charged with second degree rape in Lewis County, Washington. He is currently out on bail, and his trial is expected to start in January 2022.


== Early life ==
Lathan Moses Stanley Echols was born on January 25, 2002, in Mountlake Terrace, Washington, to a white mother and a half-Puerto Rican, half-black father. He was raised by his mother in the north side of Seattle. He began rapping in his early teens and started his music career in the eighth grade. Echols first attended Mountlake Terrace High School, then transferred to Shorecrest High School in the tenth grade. He later dropped out of school following the success of his song "Pull Up", and went on to pursue his career, heading to Los Angeles to record.


== Career ==


=== 2016–2018: Career beginnings and Northsbest ===
In 2016, Lil Mosey uploaded his first song, titled "So Bad", to the music streaming service SoundCloud, quickly receiving 50,000 views. On November 13, 2016, Mosey competed and placed fourth at the Coast 2 Coast Live Seattle All Ages Edition.
"Pull Up" was Lil Mosey's first released track and served as his debut commercial single. Its music video reached over 25 million views on YouTube in the first 16 months upon its release. On March 14, 2018, Mosey released his second commercial single "Boof Pack". Its music video has received over 13 million views on YouTube in just over a year after its release. Around 4 months later, he released "Noticed" as his third commercial single alongside a music video directed by Cole Bennett, also with the help of Jesus Sevilla, his cousin. The music video was viewed just short of 10 million times within the first two weeks of its release. In the video, "Mosey and his friends live the good life as they relax in a luxury apartment, which overlooks a beautiful beach".On October 19, 2018, he released his debut studio album titled Northsbest, which includes all three of his commercial singles and eight other tracks. The only artist featured is BlocBoy JB.


=== 2019–present: Certified Hitmaker, "Blueberry Faygo", and Universal ===
On November 8, 2019, he released his second studio album, Certified Hitmaker. The album was reissued on February 7, 2020, with the release of the single, "Blueberry Faygo", which later became his highest-peaking song on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number 8 and charting well internationally. On June 26, 2020, Lil Mosey released the single "Back at It" featuring Lil Baby. And on August 5, 2020, Lil Mosey released the single "Top Gone" featuring Puerto Rican singer Lunay. Both singles appeared on the deluxe edition of Certified Hitmaker, titled Certified Hitmaker (AVA Leak), released on August 14, 2020.On August 30, 2020, during an interview with The Hollywood Fix, Mosey teased a new project by playing a snippet of new music. The project was later announced to be a new mixtape titled Universal. The mixtape will act as a transition between Certified Hitmaker, and his upcoming third studio album: The Land of Make Believe. The mixtape is expected to be released before the end of 2020, however no specific release date has been announced. On October 1, 2020, Mosey released a video on his YouTube channel celebrating the world premiere of FIFA 21, which doubles as the trailer for Universal. In it, Mosey wears a custom jersey and performs a medley of his songs "Bands Out Tha Roof", "Blueberry Faygo", and "Live This Wild", respectively.Mosey has also appeared on various artists' songs, such as "Vicious" by Canadian singer Tate McRae, "Thug Kry" by American rapper YG, "No Honorable Mentions" by Trippie Redd, which also features Quavo, and "Krabby Step", with American rappers Tyga and Swae Lee, from the soundtrack for The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge on the Run.On November 13, 2020, Mosey released "Jumpin Out the Face", as the lead single for his upcoming mixtape Universal, along with an accompanying music video.On January 25, 2021, his nineteenth birthday, Mosey celebrated by releasing "Holy Water", as the second single for Universal. The next week, he released the third single, "Enough".


=== Certified Hitmakers record label ===
In 2020, Mosey opened his own record label Certified Hitmakers.
His first signee was Jae Lynx, who released his debut single "Bad Girl Vibes" under the label on November 6, 2020. On January 14, 2021, Lynx released his second single "Regrets" with YNW BSlime.


== Musical style ==
Lil Mosey is known for his melodic flow and lyrics that are tailored to his life. When asked if the term "mumble rap" applies to him in an interview with Complex, Lil Mosey says "I wouldn't consider myself a mumble rapper, because I don't know what that is. But when I talk, I mumble." Although Lil Mosey does not consider his sound to be similar to Meek Mill's, he does consider the rapper an influence as in an interview with XXL Magazine, he describes how he would always listen to Meek Mill's song "Dreams and Nightmares" when he was younger. When asked in the same interview about what comparisons he has drawn, Mosey responded "Music-wise, they be comparing me to Drake".


== Live performances ==
Lil Mosey has toured with rappers Smooky MarGielaa, Lil Tjay, Polo G and Smokepurpp. In 2018, Lil Mosey was on tour with Juice Wrld and YBN Cordae, serving as the opening act for Juice Wrld's WRLD Domination Tour. He has also received a co-sign from Lil Xan, and he says his first real live performance as an established artist came when Lil Xan brought him on stage during his concert in Seattle. The rapper also performed at Rolling Loud in 2018. Lil Mosey has also toured with Sauve and Bandkidjay. He has given free performances, such as one in Seattle for a baby toy drive. He  toured Europe, Canada and the US on the Certified Hitmaker Tour.


== Legal issues ==


=== Rape charge ===
On April 2, 2021, Echols was charged with one count of second-degree rape in Lewis County, Washington, for engaging in sexual intercourse with a male individual that was incapable of giving consent. He has pleaded not guilty. The charge stems from an alleged incident on the night of January 5, 2020, at a cabin in Randle, Washington, where Echols had hosted a party. Echols was not an adult at the time of the incident, as he turned 18 on January 25, 2020. In accordance with a pre-trial sexual assault protective order, Echols is ordered not to contact or come within 500 feet of the victim, and is prohibited from possessing firearms or using drugs. If convicted, Echols faces a minimum of 78 to 102 months and a maximum of life in prison.Upon being contacted by the Morton Police Department on January 6, 2020, the alleged victim told a detective that she attended the party with a friend and blacked out after drinking White Claw alcoholic beverages and champagne provided at the party. The woman stated that she could not clearly remember the events of the rest of the night, and could only remember walking in her underwear to an upstairs bedroom, being told by individuals that she had sex, and being told that there was video recording of the intercourse. However, she had no memory of the rape. She stated that upon waking up the following morning, she and the friend she came with left the cabin.On January 9, 2020, the Morton Police Department interviewed the woman's friend, who stated that she had consensual sex with Echols in his car, during which she felt a pain in her legs. She stated that she had a "fuzzy" memory of what happened afterwards, but that the next thing she remembered was multiple men forcing themselves onto her, including a man identified as Francisco P. Prater saying "wake up, wake up, suck this dick, bitch." Francisco P. Prater was also charged with one count of second-degree rape, in tandem with Echols' rape charge. She also stated that she had bruises on her arm, neck, and inner knee that she did not know the origin of. In a later interview with police, the woman stated that she remembered waking up to Echols raping her in an upstairs bedroom after she had blacked out.On April 21, 2021, a $50,000 warrant was issued for Echols' arrest after he failed to show up for a required court appearance at a preliminary hearing. An attorney for Echols claimed that he had not shown up for his appearance because the court summons had been sent to an address Echols had not lived at for five years, and that he had no knowledge of the preliminary hearing until after the warrant was issued. After a deal was made between Echols and the Lewis County Prosecutor's Office to quash the warrant, Echols appeared in court on April 27. On July 13, Echols appeared at a pre-trial omnibus hearing.Francisco P. Prater, who was allegedly present at the party on January 5, 2020, was also charged with one count of second-degree rape in tandem with Echols' rape charge. Like Echols, Prater did not show up for his scheduled court appearance on April 21, 2021, leading to a warrant being issued for his arrest. Prater failed to appear in court after Echols' appearance on April 27, and as of that date the warrant for his arrest remains active. Joshua D. Darrow was named as a third defendant in the rape case in July 2021. Darrow is accused of restraining the victim as Echols and Prater raped her. Darrow is currently out on unsecured bail and has also been issued a pre-trial sexual assault protective order.Echols is currently out on $50,000 unsecured bail. He is expected to go on trial alongside Prater and Darrow on January 24, 2022.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted songs ===


== Guest appearances ==


=== Other charted and certified songs ===
Notes


== References ==


== Further reading ==
10 Seattle Artists Lil Mosey Needs To Hear Before Saying They're All Wack