Jeremy Zimmer is an American entertainment industry executive who co-founded and serves as the chief executive officer of United Talent Agency (UTA).


== Early life and education ==
Zimmer is the son of novelist Jill Schary Robinson and stockbroker Jon Zimmer, and the grandson of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studio chief Dore Schary. His family was Jewish. He was raised on the West Coast of the United States, but relocated during his senior year of high school so Robinson could focus on her career. Zimmer attended, but did not graduate from, Boston University.


== Career ==
In 1979, at the age of 19, Zimmer left college to work in the William Morris Agency mailroom. After transferring to Los Angeles, he joined ICM Partners in 1984. There, Zimmer became a talent agent, working on films such as Die Hard (1988), The Fisher King (1991), and In the Line of Fire (1993). He later ran the agency's Motion Picture Literary and Motion Picture Packaging divisions. In 1989, Zimmer left ICM for Bauer/Benedek Agency, where he became a partner. In 1991, the firm combined with Leading Artists Agency to form United Talent Agency (UTA).Zimmer headed UTA's literary department from 1997–2006. He has been credited with creating the agency's branding, licensing, and endorsements division, as well as UTA's agent training program. Zimmer was named the agency's chief executive officer in 2012. Throughout his career as an agent, Zimmer has represented Mariah Carey, Bryan Cranston, DJ Khaled, Chelsea Handler, Kevin Hart, Anthony Hopkins, Marc Lawrence, Brian Robbins, M. Night Shyamalan, and YG.Schary and Zimmer ranked number eight in Vanity Fair's 2017 list of the "25 Most Important Families in Hollywood History". Zimmer, Kramer, and Sures ranked number 33 on The Hollywood Reporter's 2017 list of the 100 "most powerful people in entertainment".


== Personal life ==
Zimmer has been married twice. In 2004, Zimmer married his second wife, Marisa Lynn Miller, in a civil ceremony in Brentwood, California. Her father co-founded the Miller's Outpost retail chain of stores. He has four children.


== References ==


== External links ==
Bryant, Adam (December 14, 2013). "Jeremy Zimmer of United Talent Agency, on Accepting Ideas". The New York Times.