Hamisi Shaban Taletale, also known as Babu Tale (born 31 December 1982), is a Tanzanian talent manager and a politician presently serving as the Chama Cha Mapinduzi's Member of Parliament for Morogoro South constituency since November 2020. He is the co-founder of the WCB Wasafi music label. Tale represents artists including Diamond Platnumz, Madee, Rayvanny, Mbosso, Rich Mavoko, and Dogo Janja. Through Rayvanny, Tale was the first manager to bring BET Award wins to Tanzania and the first in Africa to win MTV Europe Music Awards for both "Best African Act" and "Worldwide Act" through Diamond Platnumz's major win in 2015. He helped to build names for Bongo Flava now-owned music stars such as Tundaman, Mb Doggy, Keyshia and Z Anto.


== Early life ==
Babu Tale was born and raised in Dar es Salaam with eight siblings, in a two-bedroom house. Due to financial problems, he was the only child to study and complete ordinary education, using a scholarship after winning the UMISETA Challenge for impersonating other people such as Julius Nyerere and many others. He chose to study at Makongo Secondary School. He started comedy earlier, but gave up because of his wife, opening another opportunity for him.He was arrested and taken to Tanzania court of law for debts.


== Career ==
Tale started his career organizing shows; during this time of his career he met Madee, Tanzanian music star and a co-founder of TipTop Connection. Earlier, Tale tried to be a musician but he could not memorize lyrics. Due to his talent at impersonations, his brother helped him find work doing radio jingles at the East Africa Radio, where he worked with Rehema Charamila, popularly known as Ray C, on her radio show Music Box at the time. When Tale's sister died, Madee wrote a song "Kazi yake Mola" featuring Mandojo & Domokoya that was dedicated to Tale's sister. The song became a nationwide hit. Tale and his brother, Abdu Bonge, found an interest in music which became the start of his career as a talent manager. He entered the field to impress women, but later turned it into a business.
After he started working with TipTop Connection, Tale helped develop artists such as MB Doggy, Z anto, Keyshia, Tundaman, Pingu & Desso, PNS, Kassim Mganga and Loveness Love. Artists under his management won Kilimanjaro Tanzania Music Awards back to back every year. He later had misunderstandings with his artists and chose to work independently. He worked with Peter Msechu on his first official track "Hasira Hasala". He then worked with Quick Rocka on his debut track "Bullet." He was employed for a year by spice music in 2010. He later worked with Suma Lee on his biggest hit "Hakunaga" before he officially started to manage Diamond Platnumz. Their first official project was "Moyo wangu."


== References ==


== External links ==

Babu Tale on Instagram