Caleb Zackery "Don" Toliver (; born June 12, 1994) is an American rapper and singer. He released his first major label mixtape, Donny Womack, in August 2018. He is known for his singles "No Idea" and "After Party", from his debut studio album, Heaven or Hell (2020), which gained popularity on the video-sharing app TikTok, as well as his August 2018 feature on fellow rapper and label-boss Travis Scott's song "Can't Say", from Scott's third studio album, Astroworld. In August 2020, he was featured alongside Nav and Gunna on the song "Lemonade" by Internet Money.


== Early life ==
Toliver was born and raised in Houston, Texas. He had no musical experience prior to releasing music in 2017. His father was a rapper during the Swishahouse movement in the early 2000s, and would commonly play music around him growing up.


== Career ==


=== 2017: Playa Familia and singles ===
He released a collaborative mixtape, titled Playa Familia, with Yungjosh93. In late 2017, Toliver released the solo singles, "Diva" and "I Gotta". In March 2018, he signed to Atlantic Records and rapper Chedda Da Connect's record label We Run It Entertainment, in conjunction with Artist Partner Group. Also in early 2018, Toliver released "Make Sumn" and "Checks", with a music video.


=== 2018–2020: Breakthrough, Cactus Jack and Heaven or Hell ===
In July 2018, Toliver released the single "Holdin' Steel" featuring Dice Soho. The song was also accompanied by a music video. On August 2, Toliver released his major label debut mixtape, Donny Womack, along with a music video for the song "Diamonds".The following day, on August 3, 2018, Travis Scott released his third studio album, Astroworld, on which Toliver was featured on the thirteenth track, "Can't Say". The single was later accompanied by a video that was sponsored by Yves Saint Laurent. On August 6, it was announced that Toliver had signed to Scott's Cactus Jack imprint label. Toliver appeared alongside Scott, Nav, Sheck Wes and Gunna in the music video for Nav’s single "Champion", which Scott was featured on. In September, his single "Diva" was later remixed by rapper Kevin Gates.After his appearance on Astroworld, Toliver released several singles under the Cactus Jack label throughout 2019 including: "Back Up" featuring Wiz Khalifa, "Best You Had", "Can't Feel My Legs", and "No Idea". The song "No Idea" eventually became a viral sensation on social media/video sharing platform TikTok. In November 2019, Toliver accompanied Scott during the second Astroworld Festival. On December 13, Toliver released the music video for "Can't Feel My Legs". On December 27, Toliver along with other Cactus Jack members, known as JackBoys, released the compilation album JackBoys. Toliver, alongside Scott and Luxury Tax, contributed on the songs "Gang Gang" with Wes, "Had Enough" by Toliver featuring Quavo and Offset of the hip hop trio Migos, and "What To Do?" by JackBoys and Scott featuring Toliver.On January 17, 2020, Toliver was featured on American rapper Eminem's eleventh studio album, Music to Be Murdered By, on the song "No Regrets". On February 21, Toliver was announced to open for The Weeknd's After Hours Tour alongside Sabrina Claudio.On March 10, 2020, Toliver announced his debut studio album, Heaven or Hell, on social media and announced its release date. The album was released three days later on March 13 and features guest appearances from Travis Scott, Kaash Paige, Quavo, Offset, and Sheck Wes.
On May 8, 2020, Toliver was featured on Nav's song "Recap", from the latter's third studio album, Good Intentions.On July 24, 2020, Toliver and his DJ Chase B released a collaborative single titled "Cafeteria", featuring Gunna, from their upcoming collaborative project, Escapism. Exactly one week later, on July 31, he released a song titled "Clap", for the soundtrack of the film F9, in which the soundtrack was released on the same day and the song became the seventh single.
On August 14, 2020, Toliver was featured alongside Nav on "Lemonade" by Internet Money and Gunna. The song earned him his highest-charting song on the Billboard Hot 100, eventually peaking at number 6 on the chart. On the same day, he was featured on Kaash Paige's song "Grammy Week", from her debut studio album, Teenage Fever. Exactly one week later, on August 21, he was featured alongside Big Sean on Nas' song "Replace Me", from his thirteenth studio album, King's Disease. On October 22, he was featured alongside Gucci Mane on Rico Nasty's single "Don't Like Me", from the latter's debut studio album, Nightmare Vacation.


=== 2021: Life of a Don ===
In February 2021, Toliver teased his next project, titled Life of a Don, on Twitter. On May 4, Toliver released the lead single, "What You Need". One month later on June 18, Toliver released the second single from the album, "Drugs N Hella Melodies", featuring his girlfriend, American singer Kali Uchis.On August 20, 2021, Toliver released the single "Don't Go", a collaboration with American record producer Skrillex and Canadian singer Justin Bieber. On August 29, Toliver appeared on Kanye West's album Donda on the track "Moon", alongside Kid Cudi. On September 28, Toliver revealed the release date and cover art for Life of a Don. Life of a Don was released on October 8, 2021. The album included features from Travis Scott, Kali Uchis, SoFaygo, Baby Keem, and HVN.


== Personal life ==
He has been dating American  singer Kali Uchis since 2020.


== Discography ==

Donny womack (2018)
Heaven or Hell (2020)
Life of a Don (2021)


== Concert tours ==
Supporting

Travis Scott – Astroworld Festival (2019)
The Weeknd – After Hours Tour (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website