Trey Fanjoy is an American music video director. Fanjoy has directed over 150 major label music videos. Her videos have appeared on CMT, VH1, GAC, The Nashville Network, CMT Canada, and MTV. She is the first woman to win the Country Music Association Award for Video of the Year and, to date, the only woman to win the award twice and one of two people to win the award three times.


== Music videos ==
She has been nominated multiple times at the Country Music Association Awards, Academy of Country Music, Billboard Music Awards and CMT Music Awards and MTV Awards with numerous nominations and several wins.
Fanjoy collaborated multiple times with Taylor Swift on multiple music videos, including "Tim McGraw", "Teardrops on My Guitar", "Our Song", "Picture to Burn", "Love Story" and "White Horse". Fanjoy also directed videos for Reba McEntire, including "Somebody", "He Gets That from Me", "Strange" and "Consider Me Gone".
Trey has directed videos for artists outside of the United States. British pop group, Atomic Kitten, had Fanjoy direct the video for their hit-single, "Whole Again", which went #1 in over thirty countries. Her video for Five For Fighting's hit "100 Years" stayed on VH-1's Top 20 Countdown for 18 weeks.


== Other appearances ==
Fanjoy continues to garner nominations and accolades.  Most recently she won her third CMA Video Of The Year with Miranda Lambert for Bluebird. In addition, the pairing of Fanjoy with Taylor Swift won the most coveted prize for Video of the Year, as well as Female Video of the Year.  She received a 2008 MTV nomination for Swift's Teardrops On My Guitar.  Fanjoy and Swift also nabbed the 2008 CMT Video of The Year for their collaboration on the hit Our Song, which also won female video of the year at the same show. At the 2008 Country Music Association Awards, Fanjoy was nominated in the Best Music Video category for Alan Jackson's mega-hit, Good Time. In 2007, Fanjoy was nominated for George Strait's epic adventure, Seashores of Old Mexico, at the annual ACM Awards in Las Vegas. Other nominations include two Video of the Year nods for Miranda Lambert's "Kerosene" and Lee Ann Womack's "I May Hate Myself in the Morning" at the  2006 Academy of Country Music Awards. The highly praised Kerosene was also nominated in multiple categories at the 2006 CMT Awards.
With a background and interest in documentary filmmaking, she wrote and produced Riding the Rails, with legendary West Texas singer/songwriter Joe Ely, which featured Bruce Springsteen.  Fanjoy also wrote, produced and directed a documentary for the Frist Center for the Visual Arts on legendary rodeo tailor, Manuel, which was narrated by Linda Ronstadt. She is set to direct the full-length documentary, funded by the Country Music Hall of Fame, on the musically influential Border Radio movement titled Outlaw X.
Fanjoy has worked with numerous film studios on soundtrack tie-ins. She has worked with Paramount Studios', How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days, Walt Disney Pictures' The Rookie and the thriller Angel Eyes.
Her clear vision and on-set calm were captured in two highly rated CMT Networks’  “Making of the Video” specials.  The first of these for the Reba McEntire smash hit Somebody and the other for Trip Around the Sun with Martina McBride and Jimmy Buffett.


== Awards ==


== Videos directed ==
218 music videos are currently listed here.


== References ==


== External links ==
Trey Fanjoy at IMDb