Matthew S, pseudonym for Matteo Scapin, is an Italian electronic music producer, musician and composer. He is known for his diverse production style, which is influenced primarily by electronic music and ambient music, but also elements of tech house.


== Biography ==

Matthew S began his career in 2009 with the release of his first EP Reiz Musik 014 and after the release of the EP, he then decided to focus on electronic music, in order to use its eclectic features; he believed that electronic music was very versatile, contaminated and suggestive. He teaches a DJ Ableton Live music sequencing software course at the Istituto Musicale Veneto di Thiene (Veneto City of Music) and also teaches at Pantarhei in Vicenza.
He collaborated as sound designer with Gruppo L'Espresso and Gruppo Magnolia, a TV production society leader in creating new entertainment formats that include different genres.In 2015, Matthew S produced his first album Call Me by Your Name with fashion designer Von Felthen. He was invited to perform at the MTV Digital Days festival at Royal Villa of Monza in Monza on 11 September 2015, and won "Best New Generation Electro" by MTV New Generation (MTV Italy) He also received the prize "Città di Thiene 2015".In 2016, he signed a contract for exclusive publishing with Il Nuovo Rumore Italiano (INRI) / Metatron, a well-known independent publisher in Italy which gives the producer access to his own Italian and international network. and he published the songs "Maneki Neko" and the single "Inside" The music video for his single "Inside" was heavily played from September to October on MTV Music (Italy)
. After publishing "Inside", He created a remix of the song "Tokai" by Anti Anti featuring Samuel Umberto Romano from Subsonica and Veronica. In the same year, he released a remix of Lemandorle's "Le Ragazze". He became an artist ambassador for Arturia, one of the main brands in the world for music’s hardware and software.In 2017, Matthew S released the single "Disco Ball" and in the following year he released the album First.
The voices of Leiner Riflessi (ex-Dear Jack’s front man and contestant from series 8 of the Italian X Factor) and IVYE (Landlord’s voice from series 9 of X Factor) show off respectively "Touch" that has house and underground sounds, and "Don’t bring me down" with sounds closer to electronic dance music. "Island", one of the opening tracks of First, presents a featuring with Tullia, a young songwriter from Vicenza.
The single "Touch" appeared on MTV Italy's Dance Top 10 throughout the summer. It also received airplay on the radio.In November of the same year Matthew S collaborated with some well known music producers Dirty Freek, Erick Morello and DJ P Tee Money in creating a remix album of the song "When I Came Up" by Bon Villan, a Canadian bandIn 2019, Matthew S released the single "Waves on The Moon", shifting focus away from the limitations of modern music to create an atmospheric track, and in the following months he released the single "Bounce", a trial of electronic and classical music in collaboration with  Cucina Sonora.On 27 March 2020 he released "Daydream" (for INRI Classic), a single in collaboration with the accordionist Pietro Roffi and the pianist Gian Marco Castro written during the coronavirus quarantine.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Matthew S discography on MusicBrainz