Rodrick Wayne Moore Jr. (born October 22, 1998), known professionally as Roddy Ricch, is an American rapper from Compton, California. He rose to fame in 2018 with his single "Die Young", which peaked at number 98 on the Billboard Hot 100. Ricch's first two mixtapes, Feed Tha Streets (2017) and Feed Tha Streets II (2018), also received widespread acclaim. In 2019, Ricch was featured on Nipsey Hussle's single "Racks in the Middle", which earned him a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance, and on Mustard's Grammy-nominated single "Ballin'", which reached the top 20 of the Hot 100.
Ricch's debut studio album Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial (2019) was released through Atlantic Records and Bird Vision Entertainment and debuted atop the Billboard 200. It spawned the Hot 100 number-one single "The Box", which earned him a Diamond certification by the RIAA, as well as the single "High Fashion" (featuring Mustard). Later in 2020, Ricch's feature on DaBaby's single "Rockstar" became his second number-one single on the Hot 100. His second album Live Life Fast was released in 2021.
Ricch has won several accolades, including a Grammy Award from nine different nominations, as well as two BET Awards, two BET Hip Hop Awards, and an American Music Award.


== Early life ==
Rodrick Wayne Moore Jr. was born on October 22, 1998, in Compton, California, where he was raised. Ricch attended Compton High School. He spent some time living in Atlanta in his youth. Roddy Ricch started rapping and singing as young as 8, and at the age of 12, rapped for at the time rising artist Kendrick Lamar. He began making beats in earnest at age 16. In Compton, Ricch was a member of the Park Village Compton Crips, and has two "C"s tattooed, symbolizing his alleged affiliation with the gang. He also had a brief stint in county jail at the time when his mixtape, Feed Tha Streets II was released. He listened to Lil Wayne growing up, as well as Young Thug, Future, and Speaker Knockerz.


== Career ==


=== 2017–2018: Feed Tha Streets mixtapes and collaborations ===
In November 2017, he released his debut mixtape, Feed Tha Streets, which is also his first music project. It featured songs like "Chase Tha Bag", "Hoodricch", and "Fucc It Up". The tape earned him praise from established rappers like Meek Mill, Nipsey Hussle, and 03 Greedo, as well as established record producer Mustard. In March 2018, he released an EP entitled Be 4 Tha Fame. In May of that year, Nipsey Hussle brought Ricch out as his guest at a PowerHouse concert in Los Angeles.In July 2018, he released the London on da Track-produced single, "Die Young", which he had written for a childhood friend, who was lost in a high speed chase and said in a Genius interview he had written it the night American rapper XXXTentacion died. The song—which was dedicated, in part, to the childhood friend and its music video would go on to accumulate over 80 million views on YouTube and 120 million streams on Spotify. In August 2018, he released the single "Ricch Forever", produced by DJ Bugsy. That month, Marshmello released a preview of a them with a collaborative track single with Ricch titled "Project Dreams", which was released on December 7, 2018.
In October 2018, Meek Mill brought Ricch out as his guest at a PowerHouse concert in Philadelphia. Mill also gifted him a "Dreamchasers" chain, appearing on his fourth studio album Championships (2018), in which he was a feature alongside Future and Young Thug on the song "Splash Warning" from the album. On November 2, 2018, Ricch released his second mixtape, Feed Tha Streets II. The album, which features the singles "Die Young" and "Every Season", peaked at number 67 on the Billboard 200 chart and at number 36 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. Later in the month, Marshmello previewed a new track with Ricch.


=== 2019–2020: Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial and "The Box" ===
On February 15, 2019, Ricch was featured alongside American record producer Hit-Boy on now-late American rapper Nipsey Hussle's single "Racks in the Middle", later becoming both first top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100, and earning him a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance. Exactly one month later, on March 15, he was featured alongside fellow American rapper Tyga on the remix of American singer Post Malone's hit single "Wow". On June 28, he collaborated with American DJ and record producer Mustard on the single, "Ballin'", off of Mustard's third studio album, Perfect Ten, which became Mustard's highest charting song on the Hot 100 as a lead artist, peaking at number 11. The song received a nomination for Best Rap/Sung Performance at the 2020 Grammy Awards.On October 11, 2019, Ricch released the single "Big Stepper", the lead single of his debut studio album, Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial. Two weeks later, on October 25, he released the album's second single, "Start wit Me", featuring fellow American rapper Gunna. Exactly one month later, on November 25, he released the album's third and final pre-release single "Tip Toe", featuring fellow American rapper A Boogie wit da Hoodie. On December 6, 2019, the album was released, debuting and spending four non-consecutive weeks at number one on the Billboard 200. It became the longest running number one debut rap album in the US since 2003. The album featured Ricch's highest-charting single, "The Box", which topped the Hot 100 for eleven weeks, as well as "Start wit Me" featuring Gunna, which peaked at number 56. Because of the strength of "The Box", a collaboration with Mustard, "High Fashion", which appeared on the album, reached the top 40 at number 35, the week he hit number one on the Hot 100. The song later peaked at number 20.In 2020, he appeared on a number of songs by other artists, including the Nipsey Hussle-ode "Letter to Nipsey" by Meek Mill, "Numbers" by A Boogie wit da Hoodie alongside Gunna and London on da Track, and "Walk Em Down" by NLE Choppa. In April 2020, Ricch was featured on DaBaby's "Rockstar", which became his second number-one single on the Billboard Hot 100, spending seven weeks on top, as well as reaching number one in the UK, and in several other countries. Ricch became the first artist to achieve his first two number-one singles in the same year since Ed Sheeran did it in 2017. Ricch won Album of the Year at the 2020 BET Awards. He has spent eighteen cumulative weeks atop the Hot 100 so far, the most for any artist in 2020. On July 3, 2020, Ricch was featured alongside fellow American rapper 50 Cent on late fellow American rapper Pop Smoke's posthumous single "The Woo", from Smoke's debut studio album, Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon. The track reached number nine in the UK and number 11 on the Hot 100. On August 27, Ricch featured on fellow American rapper Cordae's single "Gifted".
During an interview with GQ, Ricch revealed that his second studio album is completed, however, he said that he is waiting for the right time to release it. Ricch called the album "a full-blown masterpiece. A real idea. A real body of work". On November 24, 2020, he teased towards an upcoming project titled "Love Is Barely Real Anymore".Ricch tied with The Weeknd as the most nominated artists at the 2020 American Music Awards, both with eight nominations.  He received six nominations at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, including for Song of the Year and Record of the Year for "The Box" and "Rockstar", respectively. Variety named him Breakthrough Artist of 2020, and Apple Music awarded him Album and Song of the Year in 2020, with Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial and "The Box" respectively being the most-streamed album and song of the year globally on the platform. He was ranked third on the Billboard Year-End chart for Top Artists.


=== 2021: Shooting and Live Life Fast ===
On February 21, 2021, a shooting occurred at Roddy Ricch and 42 Dugg's music video shoot, which left three people injured in Atlanta, Georgia. American hip hop artist OMB Peezy was later charged in connection with the shooting with aggravated assault with a deadly weapon and possession of a firearm during the commission of a crime. Roddy and 42 Dugg were unharmed. All three injured survived. The music video for the song "4 Da Gang" was eventually released and the song peaked at 67 on the Billboard Hot 100. On June 4, 2021, Ricch released the single "Late at Night", which debuted at number 20 on the Hot 100. On June 11, 2021, Ricch was featured on Polo G's third studio album Hall of Fame on the track "Fame & Riches".
On September 14, 2021, Roddy Ricch posted a story to Instagram, previewing an album titled Live Life Fa$t. He would use the album title again on Twitter and Instagram posts on September 16. On November 30, 2021,  in preparation for the release of his album, Roddy deleted all his Instagram posts. On December 1, 2021, Ricch officially announced that he would be releasing Live Life Fast on December 17. The album was officially released on December 17, 2021. It debuted at No. 1 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums Chart (being Ricch's second album to do so), selling 62,000 units. It was generally met with mixed reviews from critics.


== Personal life ==
In 2019, Roddy Ricch was arrested for felony domestic violence after he allegedly physically assaulted his girlfriend at his Los Angeles home. Arrest records show that the Compton native was booked at 5:40 a.m. PT and later released on a $50,000 bond. All charges were later dropped by the Los Angeles County District Attorney’s office due to insufficient evidence.In 2020, Roddy Ricch had a son with model and businesswoman Allie Minati.He grew up in a Christian household.


== Artistry ==
On the transcending themes of his music, Ricch draws inspiration from his life, stating: "As I experience life, my music is gonna evolve. At the same time, I still do tell the stories from my world because there are unlimited stories and unlimited people from that place. I'll always represent them. As my life begins to change and I do different things, I still want to be able to tap in and relate to them".Cady Lang of  Time magazine noted Ricch's "remarkable musical style as a rapper combines his West Coast [hip hop] roots with the sound of trap music and Chicago drill rap, which gets an extra gravitas with his lyrics that range from pondering the tough realities of life to bouts of uninhibited bravado".Ricch has been recognized for his raspy voice "that works wonders with vocal filters". Paul Thompson of Vulture called Ricch "an undeniably talented vocalist and occasionally a compelling songwriter", opining how he "frequently adopts the same syntax and vocal intonations as Young Thug". His music style blends rapping and singing.Ricch has cited Kendrick Lamar, who is also from his hometown of Compton, as a musical influence. He has stated that rapper Speaker Knockerz is his biggest influence, along with the "basis" of his music coming from him. Ricch also credits Young Thug, Future and Gucci Mane as influences.
I feel like the problem with us nowadays is we want everything right now. But the music isn't gonna be progressive when you're putting something out every three months, because you ain't been through nothing; you still feel like how you felt when you [last] dropped the music. To me, stuff doesn't happen in my life every single day. Maybe for some people it does, but my life don't happen that fast. I have to give myself time to actually go through things so I can speak on it, and have a new understanding of life. It's not like I make music that's not my life, so I feel like I need to give my life time to inspire me.


== Discography ==

Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial (2019)
Live Life Fast (2021)


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==

List of artists who reached number one in the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website