Francinne (born 22 December 1993), whose birth name is Francine de Almeida Porto, is a Brazilian singer, known for the hits "Tum Tum" partner with Wanessa Camargo and "Segue o Baile" with Clau.


== Biography and Career ==
Francinne started her career in 2011 as an official cover of Britney Spears in Brazil. In 2015, she released her debut single "I'm Alive", and the track was featured on the official soundtrack of Rede Globo's soap opera Babilônia.
The blonde also lent her voice to TV commercials and other dubbing projects and signed the composition of songs for the soundtrack of SBT's soap operas Carinha de Anjo and As Aventuras de Poliana. During this period, the singer gained notoriety and prominence, conquering her space in the Brazilian music scene.
In 2017 she signed with Universal Music label, now pursuing a solo career as Francinne, scoring hits such as ‘Tum Tum’ with Wanessa Camargo, ‘Cinderelas’ with Rebecca and “Aceleradinha” with MC Zaac. After numerous releases, the gaúcha caught the attention of South Korean artists and received an invitation from singer Spax to share the vocals of the song “Te Quiero Mas”, a duet in two Korean and Portuguese languages, marking the first musical partnership between the two nations, which caught the attention of South Korean businessmen who landed her an artistic career contract announcing a K-POP project and her going to South Korea to record a single and MV.
After the international experience, the singer showed all her talent and empowerment with her first EP entitled “TAKEDOWN”, bringing in this new project an engagement speech talking about an empowered woman who owns herself, the track that bears the same name as the EP “Takedown” that won its music video version, with breathtaking scenes, full of choreography and effects, praising its freedom and resignification of its career.
Completely owner of her history and her career, she opened her own record label to be able to give voice to the many independent singers who are looking for an opportunity and cannot find a place in the market that is still sexist. A stamp just for women artists, where they won't suffer from the pressure or control of men who feel entitled to control their art or their dreams.
It is no surprise to anyone that Francinne has adopted Korean culture in her daily life, after recording her feat with singer Spax, the blonde became increasingly closer to Korean culture, awakening the interest of big businessmen in the K-POP industry in managing abroad, after months of preparation, the singer landed on July 12, 2021 in South Korea to finalize her international project and debut in South Korean territory.
Without Asian ancestry Francinne is the first foreign singer to launch a fully KPOP project simultaneously between the two nations. All production will be done by renowned professionals who have signed productions by groups like Red Velvet, Super Junior, Jessie among others, and the first single arrives in early November 2021 accompanied by a Music Video (MV), which promises to be a super production full of choreography and vocals worthy of a KPOP success bringing all the characteristics of the musical genre, including the Brazilian singing in Korean, a language that she has been learning since the beginning of the year and always shares videos on her social networks.


== Discography ==
Corpo Caliente (2018)
Bom Demais (2018)
TumTum(2018)
Segue o Baile (2019)
Aceleradinha (2019)
Cinderelas (2019)
Sintonia (2020)
Te Quiero Mas (2020)
Atura ou Surta (2020)
Takedown (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Francinne no Instagram
Francinne no Spotify
Francinne no YouTube