Sanelisiwe Twisha (born 20 November 1987), known professionally as Moonchild Sanelly is a South African musician and dancer. She is known for her signature blue-colored hair and her self-created music genre called "Future ghetto punk". Originally from Port Elizabeth, the singer first came into limelight in the Durban poetry and music scene before relocating to Johannesburg, where she has continued her musical career.
Her music has reached audiences beyond South Africa's borders, playing in festivals such as SXSW in Austin, Texas and Primavera Sound in Barcelona. In August 2018, she went on a European tour with South African hip hop group Die Antwoord. Her music fuses elements of experimental electronic, afro-punk and edgy-pop with hints of her strong kwaito, hip hop and jazz background.


== Early life and education ==
Moonchild Sanelly was born in Port Elizabeth, South Africa. She was born into a musical family, with her brother being a hip hop producer, her mother a jazz singer, and her cousins kwaito dancers.She moved to Durban in 2005 to study fashion at the Linea Fashion Design Academy and stayed there for six years.


== Career ==
In 2006, Sanelly started performing in shows at Durban University of Technology with a key focus in poetry and hip hop, although she did not actually call herself a poet for a long time until she noticed people's reactions. She featured regularly on a weekend show on Gagasi FM, called Poetry with King Siso. In mid 2020, she signed a record deal with Transgressive Records. In March 2015, she released her studio album Rabulapha! with Transgressive Records. Rabulapha! earned  her a nomination at the 22nd Annual  South African Music Awards for Best Alternative Album. Red Bull discovered her music through an EP she was featured on with DJ Shimza, which was eventually a part of the Soul Candi album. In 2019, Sanelly was featured on Beyoncé's The Lion King: The Gift album in the song "My Power" along with Busiswa and Nija. Towards the end of 2019, she dropped her 4 tracks mini album project titled  Nude EP. She made a notable contribution on Our Culture, first track off Zingah's 2020 album.In 2020, she was also featured on JazziDisciples album, 0303 in the song "Askies" and later in "With Love to an Ex", from Gorillaz' seventh studio album Song Machine, Season One: Strange Timez.On June 29, 2021, her single "Yebo Teacher" was released.
She will host upcoming show Madness Method airs on BET.She made an announcement  on twitter of her feature on FIFA 2022 soundtrack.
On October 1, 2021, she announced her upcoming single "Demon" with Sadnightdynamite. The song is set to be released on October 4, 2021.


== Public image ==

Moonchild Sanelly is seen as a sex figure and has never been scared to flaunt her body or speak about sex. She gives out sex advice on Valentine's Day through her social media accounts. In an interview with Basha Uhuru, she called herself "the president of female orgasm".


== Business ventures ==
Moonchild Sanelly has her on own clothing label called Moonchild Cultwear. She owns a Naked Club and has made it clear that it is not a brothel.


== Personal life ==
Sanelly is a mother to three daughters. She was a victim of rape twice in her life, with one having been committed by her uncle.Sanelly is Xhosa and uses Xhosa language in most of her songs.


== References ==