Summer Marjani Walker (born April 11, 1996) is an American singer-songwriter. In 2017, she was signed to Love Renaissance and Interscope Records. The following year, she released the mixtape Last Day of Summer, which spawned the single "Girls Need Love", that became her first top 40 entry on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart following a remix featuring Drake. In October 2019, Walker released her debut studio album Over It, which spawned the US top 20 single "Playing Games".Over It was released to universal acclaim from music critics, it also debuted at number-two on the Billboard 200 chart, breaking the record for the biggest streaming debut-week ever for a female R&B artist; while also being certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).On November 5, 2021, she released her sophomore studio album Still Over It, which debuted at number-one on the Billboard 200. The album broke the record for most album streams in a single day by a female artist on Apple Music, and broke her previous record for largest streaming debut-week for a female R&B artist; while she also tied with Taylor Swift as the only two female artists that have held 18 songs concurrently on the Billboard Hot 100.


== Early life ==
Walker was born in Atlanta, Georgia. From 2016 to 2018, she had a small cleaning business, and she was also stripping in Atlanta. She taught herself how to play the guitar by watching tutorials on YouTube and posted various videos on the platform performing covers.


== Musical career ==


=== 2018–2019: Career beginnings and Last Day of Summer ===
Walker was discovered by a woman, who has the same name as her and works as the studio manager of an Atlanta-based label, called Love Renaissance. On October 19, 2018, Walker released her debut commercial mixtape, titled Last Day of Summer, supported by her lead single, "Girls Need Love". Her album contained her thoughts on love, doubt, and womanhood. Towards the end of 2018, she went on tour with 6lack on the From East Atlanta With Love Tour. Following the success of her mixtape, Apple Music named Walker as its newest Up Next artist in 2019, and became the number 8 R&B artist worldwide across Apple Music. On January 25, 2019, she released her first EP titled Clear, consisting of four tracks of acoustic recordings. On February 27, 2019, she released the remix to her song, "Girls Need Love", with Drake.


=== 2019–2020: Breakthrough and Over It ===
On August 23, 2019, Walker released a track, called "Playing Games" as the first official single for her debut studio album, titled Over It. The song, which contains an interpolation of Destiny's Child's number-one hit "Say My Name", was produced by London on da Track. On September 12, Walker revealed that Over It would be release on October 4 via LVRN and Interscope Records. Along with her album announcement, she shared the official artwork. Over It debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 with 134,000 units in its first week. Its debut week marked the largest streaming week for an R&B album by a female artist, in terms of on-demand audio streams. The album also topped the R&B Albums chart for 14 nonconsecutive weeks, and as of July 2020, has yet to chart below number 7. She supported Over It with her accompanying The First and Last Tour, which kicked off on October 20. Due to her social anxiety, Walker canceled the remaining 20 out of 29 dates on the tour committing to 9 of them. On November 17, Walker won her first Soul Train Music Award for Best New Artist, she later received backlash from fans for her short speech and was accused of faking her social anxiety.During early 2020, Walker collaborated with an American rapper 21 Savage on a song, titled "Secret". She also appeared on a remix for Justin Bieber's song Yummy. In April 2020, she was featured on Khalid's remix of "Eleven". On June 29, Walker announced the release of an EP, titled Life on Earth to be released on July 10. The announcement came a day after she performed "Session 32" and "Come Thru" with Usher at the 2020's BET Awards, where she was nominated for Best New Artist and Best Female R&B/Pop Artist. Life on Earth debuted atop the Billboard's Top R&B Albums chart, becoming Walker's second number one. It also debuted at number 8 on the Billboard 200 becoming her second top 10 project on the chart. Two tracks from the EP charted on the "Billboard" Hot 100, "Let It Go", and "My Affection" featuring PartyNextDoor, at numbers 84 and 86, respectively. "Come Thru" featuring Usher was certified platinum on August 20 by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). A few days later, on August 25, her song "Body" was a certified gold, "Playing Games" was a certified two-time platinum, and "Girls Need Love" was a certified three-time platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), respectively. On September 14, Walker was a musical guest on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, performing "Body" from her debut album Over It. The performance received praise from music-critics and fans alike, with Rolling Stone describing the performance as "beatific". On October 14, Summer won the Billboard Music Award for the Best Female R&B Artist at the 2020's Billboard Music Awards beating out Beyoncé and Lizzo. It became her first Billboard Music Award win from three nominations respectively. She was also nominated for Top R&B Artist and Top R&B Album for Over It. On November 23, she released a repackaged version of the Over It album, titled Over It (Complete Edition). The repackaged version of the album features all 18 songs from the standard version of the album plus additional instrumentals, a capella versions, live renditions and more. On December 10, her debut song, "Session 32" was certified gold and her collaboration featuring Jhené Aiko, titled "I'll Kill You" was a certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), respectively. On the Billboard 200 year-end chart of 2020, Over It was the second best performing R&B album of the year behind The Weeknd's After Hours and was the seventeenth best performing album overall.


=== 2021-present: Still Over It ===
Summer Walker releases her second album "Still Over It" which has since broken the record for biggest #1 R&B debut on the US albums chart since Beyonce's album "Lemonade." The album has surpassed 185-210k units within the first week of release. It was announced in late November 2021, that Summer Walker would perform at the 2021 Soul Train Music Awards.


== Personal life ==
While teaching herself guitar through YouTube tutorials, Summer worked as a stripper in an Atlanta strip club. In an interview with The Face she stated that the experience was "helping her grow out of her shell" and that it was "a fun experience".
Summer has talked about her various previous jobs in a lengthy 'thank you post' to her fans in which she stated: "Beyond Blessed. My whole life changed in a year & a half, like literally year ago I was scrubbing toilets and stripping. I'm now damn near financially free with a paid off house & car without a care in the world, and it's all cause of y'all so thank you," posted on her Instagram in Jan. 2020.She is also known to actively voice her personal opinions on issues throughout both of her Instagram pages.
In 2020 Walker announced that she was expecting her first child, with on-off boyfriend London on da Track by posting her baby bump on her social media platforms. Walker and London started their on-off again relationship after he worked on the production of her debut album, Over It, of which he is also the executive producer. In March 2021, Walker gave birth to a baby girl.
She is currently dating Larry aka LVRD Pharoh


=== Tattoos ===
Walker has approximately 30 tattoos, several of which are on her face, including her current boyfriend's name.


== Controversies ==
On March 3, 2020, Summer took to Instagram to give her opinion on a video pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic. It garnered a lot of backlash due to people claiming that she was spreading misinformation and being "xenophobic". After one commenter questioned the validity of the two-year-old video, she replied by saying, "They trifling & nasty af too so what's your point?"


== Artistry ==
Walker has said that she draws inspiration from Amy Winehouse, Jimi Hendrix, and Erykah Badu.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsOver It (2019)
Still Over It (2021)Mixtapes and EPsLast Day of Summer (2018)
Clear (2019)
Life on Earth (2020)


== Tours ==


=== Headlining ===
The First and Last Tour (2019)


== Awards and nominations ==
American Music Awards

BET Awards

Billboard Music Awards

iHeartRadio Music Awards

MTV Video Music Awards

Soul Train Music Awards


== References ==