Sean Tillmann (born February 6, 1978) is an American singer-songwriter and actor. While he has performed and released studio albums as Sean Na Na and as a member of hardcore band Calvin Krime, he is best known for his work under the stage name Har Mar Superstar.


== Life and career ==
Sean Tillmann is known in the United States' independent music community as a singer-songwriter (other projects include Calvin Krime and Sean Na Na), but is best known by his alter ego Har Mar Superstar. Har Mar Superstar is a character whose sweaty, energetic live performances were once infamous for often concluding with a perspiring, de-layered Tillmann disrobed down to a pair of briefs. His primary musical genres are contemporary R&B and pop music.He originally claimed to be Sean Tillmann's twin brother, Harold Martin Tillmann, from which he claimed his name originated. The name actually comes from a shopping center in Roseville, Minnesota, called the Har Mar Mall.Tillmann was born in Marshall, Minnesota, on February 6, 1978 at Weiner Memorial Hospital. In 1987, his family moved to Owatonna, Minnesota. He graduated from the Perpich Center for Arts Education in Golden Valley, Minnesota. His family is still based in Owatonna, where his mother and father are retired educators.After playing in a number of garage bands throughout high school, Tillmann moved to Saint Paul, Minnesota, and joined three-piece noise band Calvin Krime as bassist and lead vocalist. Over the span of three-and-a-half years, they recorded two albums and an EP and regularly toured the country. When Calvin Krime disbanded in 1998, Tillmann explored his softer pop side in Sean Na Na, but, while the music was often pretty and upbeat, the lyrics were often unexpectedly dark. Tellingly, Sean Na Na performances often ended with dead-on renditions of popular R&B artist R. Kelly's "When a Woman's Fed Up." Reflecting on what led to the creation of the Har Mar Superstar character, Tillmann said, "I kinda always thought that (I was going to do R&B), I just had to figure out how to do it ... I just had to figure out how to make beats and write songs in that style." In 2000, Tillmann enlisted the help of several Saint Paul musician friends and the result was the pseudonymously self-titled album "Har Mar Superstar" that appeared on Kill Rock Stars in 2001.
Soon, Tillmann was touring all over the United States as Har Mar Superstar. Initially, he appeared onstage in a choir robe and was accompanied solely by pre-recorded beats emanating from his MiniDisc player. After his follow-up album, You Can Feel Me, elevated Har Mar's popularity in the United States and put him on the map in the United Kingdom, his stage outfits became more theatrical and several live shows featured female dancers. By the time the third album, The Handler, was released in 2004, Har Mar Superstar regularly toured with a drummer and a bassist to fortify the prerecorded material. Shows ranged from club dates to festival engagements (Reading and Leeds Festivals).
In addition to his own headlining tours, Har Mar has opened for Ben Lee, The Strokes, Incubus, Tenacious D and the Yeah Yeah Yeahs. In 2007, Har Mar Superstar supported the Red Hot Chili Peppers on their tour of Australia and New Zealand. Fabrizio Moretti (The Strokes) and Tony Bevilacqua (Distillers) have served as Har Mar's rhythm section, playing drums and bass guitar respectively. Har Mar supported Sia Furler on her 2008 tour with Denver Dalley on bass and Nick Slack on drums. Other bassists have included Jenni Tarma, Jeff Quinn, and John Fields, while Bert Thomas, Jeff Brown and Michael Bland have manned the drum stool.
As well as being a solo artist, Har Mar Superstar is a songwriter. He has written songs for artists including The Cheetah Girls, Jennifer Lopez, Kelly Osbourne, and Ben Adams. While "Tall Boy" was rejected by Britney Spears's management, Har Mar decided to record the song for his own album, Dark Touches.In 2008, Har Mar Superstar was part of the live touring set-up of Neon Neon: the band created by Super Furry Animals' Gruff Rhys and producer/solo artist Boom Bip. Har Mar sings plus plays percussion during live shows and is featured on the recorded version and video of "Trick for Treat": a song on the band's debut album, Stainless Style, which was nominated for the Mercury Prize in 2008. Har Mar also performed backing vocals and appeared in the video for "Catch My Disease" by Ben Lee.
Har Mar's fourth studio album, Dark Touches, was released on October 12, 2009, in the UK and on October 13, 2009, in the U.S.  Playing cities throughout the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom in 2009 and 2010, Har Mar's "Dark Touches" touring band features Denver Dalley on guitar, Jeff Quinn on bass and Will Rockwell-Scott on drums.
In February 2011, Har Mar started recording and performing with the soft rock-inspired band Gayngs and experimental rock group Marijuana Deathsquads. Har Mar and Marijuana Deathsquads teamed up for month-long residencies in Los Angeles at Spaceland (February 2011), in New York City at Bowery Electric (October 2011) and in Austin, Texas (February 2012).
Har Mar and Father John Misty (aka Josh Tillman) joined forces for a tour in May 2012. While Sean Tillmann and Josh Tillman are not related, the tour was informally referred to as the "Two Tillman(n)s Tour". Har Mar performed material from his upcoming soul album Bye Bye 17, and his band consisted of Macey Taylor on bass, Jeff Quinn on guitar, and J. Tillman on drums.Har Mar's fifth album, Bye Bye 17, was released April 23, 2013 on Julian Casablancas' Cult Records. Tillmann toured the new material throughout the United States in March, April and May 2013 with Denver Dalley on bass, Jeff Quinn on guitar and Ryan McMahon on drums.
In August and September 2013, Har Mar Superstar supported his friends the Yeah Yeah Yeahs on various tour dates. Har Mar and Lizzo toured the U.S. in September and October. A 14-date tour of the United Kingdom followed in November.
At the end of 2014, Har Mar started writing songs for a new album and toured the U.S. with The Pizza Underground.
Collaborating once again with Julian Casablancas, Tillmann released his sixth Har Mar album – Best Summer Ever—on April 15, 2016. Best Summer Ever, since its inception, has been imagined as a "Greatest Hits of Har Mar Superstar from 1950–1985," even though Tillmann was born in 1978.  Touring the United States & Europe in support of the new album, Har Mar enlisted six other musicians to bring the songs to life.
Har Mar Superstar's seventh album, Roseville, came together in the late months of 2020 and is the first true collaborative effort of the whole touring band. It was distance recorded by all of the members in their home studios and the band’s home base, Mid City Studio, in Minneapolis. The band is Nelson Devereaux, Jake Baldwin, Adam Hurlburt, Ethan Elseth, Aaron Baum, and Ryan Mach, and everyone had a hand in co-writing to help make the album. It has been described as an “existential homecoming” that chronicles Tillmann’s return to life as a Minnesotan.


== Television, film and commercials ==
Over the years, Sean Tillmann has performed on several television shows, including The Sharon Osbourne Show, Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, and Jimmy Kimmel Live! in the United States. In the United Kingdom, he has appeared on Channel 4 music programme Born Sloppy, Bo' Selecta!, and Friday Night with Jonathan Ross. In 2003 and again in 2014, he was a guest on Never Mind the Buzzcocks.
Har Mar has been spokesman for Vladivar Vodka, who produced a series of television commercials that gained an underground cult appreciation for their blatantly sexual content. Har Mar has also been a spokesman for Lynx-brand deodorant in the UK.
He made a cameo in the 2004 movie Starsky & Hutch as 'Dancing Rick', a disco dance champion who faces off in a contest with Ben Stiller's character.Har Mar played a roller derby coach in Whip It, a film by Drew Barrymore. He also contributed a cover of The Association's "Never My Love" to the film's soundtrack, with additional vocals by Adam Green (musician), instrumentation & production by Flowers of Doom (Josiah Steinbrick & Matthew "Cornbread" Compton) & Flea (musician) on trumpet.On October 26, 2009, Har Mar Superstar was the musical guest on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and earned rave reviews for his performance of "Tall Boy," immediately increasing his popularity within North America as noted in an article by MTV.In 2012, Har Mar appeared in the film Pitch Perfect as Clef No. 2 (a member of an older a cappella quartet), alongside Joe Lo Truglio, Jason Jones, and Donald Faison.In October 2014, Har Mar returned to Never Mind the Buzzcocks alongside Nicole Scherzinger, Kerry Godliman & James Acaster.
In the Season 3 premiere of Broad City, Har Mar played hipster gallery patron "Oy Bomb," a reference to the similarly named Soy Bomb who crashed Bob Dylan's 1998 Grammy performance.
Har Mar performs the theme song, and is the lead character of the "Skeleton Crew" band, for the 2017 Netflix revival of Mystery Science Theater 3000.


== Nocturnal Emotions podcast ==
On September 10, 2012, Earwolf released Har Mar's inaugural podcast, Nocturnal Emotions.  Each week Har Mar has hour-long conversations with a different musician, actor, or artist. Regular features include embarrassing moments, "Let Me Ruin Your Favorite Song," & "Let's Create a Show."  Guests have included Elliot Page, Macaulay Culkin, Alia Shawkat, Adam Green, Flea, Father John Misty, Jon Daly, MNDR, Patrick Carney, Jake Fogelnest, Wyatt Cenac, David Yow, Mae Whitman, Jenny Eliscu, Jonah Ray, P.O.S, Channy Leaneagh, Randy and Jason Sklar, Jena Friedman, Jesse Pearson, Ted Leo, Matty McLoughlin, Matt Sweeney, Jenn Robinson, Jared Swilley, Bridey Elliott, Paul Sprangers, Aaron Pfenning, Steve Agee, Harris Wittels, Cedric Bixler-Zavala, Dave Hill, Caveman, Tanlines, Doug Benson, Matt Mira, Simon O'Connor, Jack Dishel, Colin Hanks, James Levy, Ryan Jarman, Albert Hammond Jr., and Julian Casablancas. Nocturnal Emotions is available for free on Earwolf.com and iTunes.


== Honors and awards ==

In 2013, Minneapolis mayor R. T. Rybak declared Friday, September 20 to be "Har Mar Superstar Day." Tillmann was presented with an official proclamation from the city in recognition of his achievements in music and film, and in light of his continued connection to Minneapolis. In celebration, Tillmann kicked off his fall U.S. tour with a special performance that night at Minneapolis club First Avenue.Tillmann has been honored with a star on the outside mural of First Avenue, recognizing performers that have played sold-out shows or have otherwise demonstrated a major contribution to the culture at the iconic venue. Receiving a star "might be the most prestigious public honor an artist can receive in Minneapolis," according to journalist Steve Marsh.


== Personal life ==
In 2016, Tillmann moved from Brooklyn back to Minnesota, specifically to the Northeast neighborhood of Minneapolis.When the COVID-19 pandemic brought the touring world to a halt, Tillmann and his fiancée Laura Hauser created coloring books to raise funds to help impacted businesses, including the music venue First Avenue and several local bars (Grumpy’s and Palmer’s Bar).After publicly discussing getting sober and how he became a mail carrier during the pandemic while promoting his album "Roseville," three women anonymously accused Tillmann of misconduct. He issued a statement addressing the anonymous allegations on social media, specifically & categorically denying the social media details posted by the first unnamed accuser and addressing any others saying, “I am deeply sorry to anyone who feels I’ve hurt them; what matters here is not my feelings or perspective but to take these statements seriously and respectfully.”  The Star Tribune published an additional anonymous accusation in a follow-up article, as well as reports of a brewery and a bar severing business ties as a result of the rumors.


== Discography ==
Albums

Har Mar Superstar (2000, Kill Rock Stars)
You Can Feel Me (2002, Record Collection)
The Handler (2004, Record Collection)
Dark Touches (2009, Dilettante Recordings)
Bye Bye 17 (2013, Cult Records)
Best Summer Ever (2016, Cult Records)
Roseville (2021, Love OnLine)EPs

Personal Boy (2017, Love OnLine Records)Singles

"Power Lunch" (2002, B-Unique Records)
"EZ Pass" (2003, B-Unique Records)
"Brothers & Sisters" (2003, B-Unique Records)
"DUI" (2004, Record Collection)
"Body Request" (2005, Record Collection)
"Lady, You Shot Me" (2013, Cult Records)
"Prisoner" (2013, Cult Records)
"Youth Without Love" (2016, Cult Records)
"Anybody's Game" (2016, Cult Records)
"It Was Only Dancing (Sex)" (2016, Cult Records)
"How Did I Get Through The Day" (2016, Cult Records)
"Where We Began" (2021, Love OnLine)


== Awards ==
2004: NME Rock and Roll Man of the Year


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Har Mar Superstar discography at Discogs
Har Mar Superstar at IMDb