Alejandro Aranda (born August 11, 1994), known by his stage name Scarypoolparty, is an American singer, musician, and reality television personality from Pomona, California, and runner-up on the seventeenth season of American Idol. His debut album Exit Form was released on November 22, 2019.  His follow-up album length EP, Doom Hologram was released on September 4, 2020.


== Early life ==
Musically, Aranda's early influences included classical music like Beethoven, Bach and Chopin, along with Dead Can Dance, Nine Inch Nails and many other classical and contemporary artists. He continued to seek music of all kinds, having an almost innate love for music that kept pulling him towards the industry.

He started taking music seriously when he almost injured his hand in a factory while working. The sleeve of his shirt was caught in the machine.  He said of this incident:“When I turned 20, I almost lost my hand,” Aranda, now age 25, reveals to Yahoo Entertainment. “I was working at a warehouse and I got my hand stuck in the conveyor belt, and I could've really lost my hand. … It got stuck in between, and then it caught my flannel shirt; I was wearing a long sleeve and it caught. If I wasn't wearing that, it would have basically ran my whole hand through it.” While Aranda was thankfully able to extricate himself from the machinery without any serious injuries, the situation served as a wake-up call to the young virtuoso and it was then that he decided to pursue music seriously.  The incident was referenced in the lyrics of his song "Millennial Love".
He started paying attention to the calling he had.  Of this time, he has also admitted that he was seriously depressed most of his life.  Aranda used the music to deal with his emotions and feelings.  He started playing the piano and picked up guitar around the age of 19 or 20. Busking on the streets of Pomona, CA he got comfortable with being himself in front of people, he also played at Open Mic Nights and backyard concerts wherever he could. During this time in his life, he said it took him a year to get comfortable with singing and playing in front of people.
Aranda was discovered by Twin Shadow on Instagram after Alejandro reached out to him and sent him a clip of music he was working on.  Twin Shadow messaged him back and asked him to come over.  From then on, Twin Shadow believed in him, offering him odd jobs and teaching him music production.  He also helped Aranda by giving him a laptop and everything he needed to produce music.  In 2016, Twin Shadow played a tribute to Prince at the Masonic Lodge at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery.  It was here that Aranda played his first show, playing the piano as people came into the show.  Following that Twin Shadow asked him to go on the road with him as a musician in 2018.   As a keyboardist, guitarist and back up singer, they opened for artists like Beck, played festivals and even made an appearance on the Conan O’Brien Show.
In 2017, Aranda won Artist of the Year with CSUN and Five of Five Entertainment. It was from here that he started gaining traction in the world of music.He stayed at friends’ houses, often crashing on their sofas.  His friend, Oscar, now travels with him on the road.  He played at bars and busked on the streets for extra money; playing wherever he could.  He was playing at a backyard show in 2018 when an American Idol producer took notice and approached him.  The producer wanted him to go to a private audition for American Idol.  Aranda said that he wanted to just try it and see where it went.  It was during a time when he said, “I just wanted to make $20 so I could put it towards my car.”
Aranda’s American Idol audition in front of the judges was aired on ABC on March 6, 2019.  He spoke openly about the anxiety and panic attacks he had during his experience on the show.  He mentioned that he wanted to quit all the time.  He had to get used to being in front of cameras even though cameras scared him. He struggled to play on national television and be 100% himself.  He said the people on the show were amazing and really helped him.  He has had nothing but kind words for the producers and staff of the show.
Aranda was the only contestant to play 7 original songs in the show’s history, even though producers encouraged him to play covers.  Aranda told the producers, “No, I’m not going to do that.”  When they asked what he was going to play, he told them he would like to play his original songs.  Playing originals is always a risk they said, but Aranda said that he had nothing to lose.  If they “...decided not to air it, I would be fine with it.”  When he presented them his original songs, their reaction was, “These are your songs?”  He replied, “Yes, these are my own songs.”  He eventually advanced to the finale where he performed 4 originals and lost to Laine Hardy.  When asked if he was glad he didn’t win, he said it was a blessing.  “I don’t like playing music in terms of competition.  Music is an outlet tool for me.  I enjoy presenting music and sharing music.  I love music in general.  I am doing it from an honest place.”  


== American Idol ==
He received a private audition through someone who attended a backyard concert that he performed, and on April 6, 2019 he auditioned on Season 17 of American Idol  in Los Angeles, CA.  Alejandro performed two original songs, “Out Loud” and “Cholo Love.”  Immediately, the judges were drawn to him. Luke Bryan said, “I just feel like I’m in the presence of greatness.” and “It was like watching my favorite movie that I did not want to end.” Katy Perry said, “Okay Alejandro, I think you're the winner.  I think you're really special.  I think you're an absolute genius.”His audition video was released on February 6, 2019, and as of August 22, 2019 it had reached 14 million YouTube views, 8.5 million more than any other Season 17 contestant’s audition.  On March 16, 2019, Stevie Nicks wrote (on Instagram) a prophecy saying he will “perform across great stages of the world” and “...let me welcome you to the grand stage that will be your home for the rest of your extraordinary life.”
Unlike other contestants, who typically perform covers of other artists' songs, throughout Aranda's Idol journey, he performed seven different original songs.  He played 10 years on American Idol in Hollywood Week and also in the finale with an orchestra, making him the only contestant to perform four original songs in the finale of the show.  In total, he played seven original songs on the show.


== Post-American Idol ==


=== 2019 to present ===
During the Hometown Heroes Concert in Pomona, California, the mayor of Pomona declared May 19, 2019 "Alejandro Aranda Day".Immediately following his exit off American Idol, Aranda was scheduled to go on a seven-date US tour in July 2019. Tickets went on sale on the morning of May 23, every show sold out in under 15 minutes.  American Idol judge Katy Perry jokingly begged Aranda to be a "roadie" on his tour.Due to the overwhelming amount of support, he announced on June 1, that he would put on a free concert in Nashville on July 3, joined by Bizz & Everyday People. Along with that, he announced that he was working on another tour. He met Darren King at the Nashville show. Being a long-time fan of MuteMath, it was a great opportunity to play on the road with Darren King and his wife Sucre during the 2019 Fall Tour.
He released the single "Tonight" under the name Scarypoolparty on June 28, 2019, after signing with Hollywood Records. The song was co-written and co-produced by Twin Shadow. "Tonight" was performed on American Idol during the auditions as well as April 15, 2019 during the top 14 results show.
On August 7, 2019, he released the ballad "Cholo Love".  Cholo Love was played during the audition and again during the Wildcard Episode on April 15, 2019.  He wrote and produced this song for Exit Form with his friend and mentor Twin Shadow.Shortly before the show in Independence Day show in Nashville, Tennessee, Aranda announced on June 23 that he was working on a new album, and on June 24, he announced he would go on a twenty-eight stop tour from October 10 to November 21.  On June 25, he added a twenty-ninth stop in Los Angeles for November 22.
in addition to the Fall tour dates, he performed at several music festivals, including Lollapalooza in Chicago on August 3, 2019, Life Is Beautiful in September 2019 and Austin City Limits Music Festival in October 2019. On June 25, he added a twenty-ninth stop in Los Angeles for the Fall Tour.
He released the single "Diamonds" on October 4, 2019 along with a Youtube video and Behind the Scenes video.  Perhaps his grittiest song to date.  It was to set the stage for upcoming albums and a separation from the Idol image that was created and often in conflict with his emerging Scarypoolparty alter ego.'Exit Form', his debut album was announced on November 5, 2019 and released on November 22, 2019.In talking about Exit Form, he said he had 50 songs to go through.  “I wanted to make an album that was fearless.  I decided to make the journey of industrial, pop, classical music.  The album is barely the beginning of what I want to do.”
Very humbled by the show and glad that the show is bringing more originality.  Glad to be a stepping stone for people.  How scary it is to play on National television and be yourself in front of the cameras.  Appearance on American Idol.  Hopes that they get more creative and show more originality.  It’s a platform for people and artists.
Aranda has many celebrity fans such as Finneas who attended his acoustic performance at the Moroccan Lounge on July 15, 2019 and called him a G.O.A.T.
When asked about his debut album Exit Form, Aranda mentioned that he enjoys experimenting with different sounds.  “I decided to go off in a non-acoustic direction to show my love of different styles of music.”  Aranda said he had 50 songs to go through.  “I wanted to make an album that was fearless.  I decided to make the journey of industrial, pop, and classical music.  The album is barely the beginning of what I want to do.”Aranda mentioned that his next album will be “experimental” and would include “...a few different genres.”
As far as Activism, Aranda really supports the homeless, recognizing the huge problem in the Los Angeles area and around the world.  He has already stood up for the homeless and mental health.
2020 happened and derailed some of the plans for his European tour.  He was comfortable with quarantine, and started working on music.  He was one of the first artists to do live streams during this time, which he did often.  He was featured on Lollapalooza's 2020 online festival, which showed previously recorded concert sets.On March 2, 2021 Scarypoolparty released a collaborative single with Nothing,Nowhere. The song is a precursor to Scarypoolparty's 2021 EP titled Los Angeles which will release worldwide on March 26.
On August 27, 2021 Aranda released a 21-song album, The Act of Forgiveness.  This double album includes 21 songs that he self-produced.  The album includes “improvised composition, cinematic post-rock swell, and unflinchingly honest lyrics to weave a narrative about the winding journey to choosing forgiveness and the desire to find joy, love and friendship.” [31]  Aranda collaborated with Emmy-award winning and Tony-winning composer Rob Mathes on an 18-piece orchestra, adding orchestral arrangements on 12 of the album’s tracks.  
“The Act of Forgiveness is an album I made with the idea of making each song sound like a movie. It’s an album I am extremely proud of,” says Scarypoolparty. “The Act of Forgiveness is a story I wanted to tell in chapters; the story of love and heartbreak through relationships and how we all react differently, creating movie-like scenarios around life and not wanting to look at the real picture or past our flawed imagination, when we become totally lost in our imagination, and finally how we can lose ourselves in our environment and get totally lost as to what is real and what isn’t.”The Act of Forgiveness Track List
Daily Dose of Her Smile, Poison, Falling Down, Friends, Cellphones, Movie Screens, Beautiful, Blesser, Heat of Desire, Malibu, Beach House, The Darkness, The Act of Forgiveness, Felios, Lonely Boy, Death City Drive, Spelloutriver, Holy Rejection, NYC, Magic, 3D
The Beautiful Liar tour with X Ambassadors and Taylor Janzen kicked off on October 15, 2021.  Scarypoolparty performed six to seven songs at each show on the US leg of the tour.  Taylor Janzen opened the shows, Scarypoolparty followed her, and X Ambassadors were the main act.  X Ambassadors have several number one hits including Popular Monster, Unsteady, and Renegades.  The tour was very well attended and played in 27 cities across the United States.  X Ambassadors continued on to Europe.


== Personal life ==
Alejandro Aranda was born on August 11, 1994 in Pomona, California.  While he has attested to having two parents as well as sisters, not much is known about his past.  In an interview with Launch Left, he talked about his family and the fact that he was not close to them.  However, he drew a lot of inspiration from his past to determine the type of person he wanted to be.  During the Launch Left interview on January 14, 2020, Aranda did say that while he’s not that close to his family, he does love them.
He was home-schooled in California.  His social background during that time led him to feeling scared to express himself.  He pushed himself to start speaking out in public.  He has often referred to himself as ‘within’ himself for most of his life, escaping to the library to discover music whenever he could.  He wanted to cultivate his own world view, supporting people, not judging people, not being mean, and using his soul to become the person he wanted to be.  He drew a lot of inspiration from his past to determine the type of person he wanted to be.


== Tours ==


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended Plays ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==