Michael Marquart (also known as Mike Marquart) is a Grammy-nominated American music producer and guitarist. Marquart was a drummer in the rock band A Flock of Seagulls, active during the 1980s. In the mid 2000s, Marquart founded the rock band A Bad Think. Marquart is also the founder and owner of the recording studio Windmark Recording, which he manages with his daughter Samantha Marquart. Marquart's Windmark Recording Studio has recorded many notable musical artists, including Coldplay, Jeezy, J. Cole, YG, Justin Timberlake, Pharrell, Kanye West, and Kendrick Lamar.As a record producer, Marquart has worked closely with many well-known musicians and producers, including Teddy Riley and The Neptunes (an R&B duo consisting of Chad Hugo and Pharrell Williams). His albums have featured many notable musicians, including Jeremy Stacey, Victor Indrizzo, Fernando Perdomo,  Paul Bryan, Greg Leisz, Durga McBroom, and John Philip Shenale.


== Early life ==
Marquart grew up in the town of Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin and first rock band was Wonderhorse where he played drums. As a self-taught guitarist, he played in bars during his adolescent years. In 1989, he temporarily played drums for the new wave band A Flock of Seagulls, and in 1990 recorded four songs with Alias as a drummer before moving to Virginia Beach, Virginia. Shortly thereafter, Michael married Winnie Johnson-Marquart and had a son. Marquart also has a daughter named Samantha, who is currently studio manager at Windmark Recording.


== Career ==
Marquart founded Windmark Recording in Virginia Beach, which served as an important recording space for The Neptunes during the late 1990s and early 2000s. In the mid 2000s, Marquart founded the underground electronic rock band A Bad Think and produced his second album, titled Simple Rhymes, in 2009.Marquart is now the President of Windmark Recording, which is currently based in Santa Monica, California. As a result, Marquart now spends half his time living and working in Los Angeles, California, and the other half in Virginia Beach, Virginia. In addition to Windmark, he also has a home studio called The Barn in Malibu, California; the studio was constructed using wood salvaged from the old Hollywood Bowl, originally constructed in the 1920s.Marquart's fifth studio album, produced in 2014, is titled Sleep.As his seventh studio album in 2016, Marquart produced the modern alternative rock album The Tragic End of a Dreamer, which blends diverse musical genres ranging from ambient to Southern rock, folk, and New Age music. The album features Paul Bryan (bass), Greg Leisz (pedal steel guitar), Durga McBroom (singer), and John Philip Shenale (composer).Released in April 2019, Marquart's eighth studio album is titled The Savior, which includes the single "Feel Me." In November 2019, the album received a Grammy nomination for Best Immersive Audio Album.Marquart's ninth studio album, Lifelike, was released April 2021 and is accompanied by a 20-minute documentary, Lifelike: The Making of An Album in Dolby Atmos.


== Discography ==
Albums produced by Michael Marquart include:
Lifelike (2021)
The Savior (2019)
The Tragic End of a Dreamer (2016)
Don't Forget Us (2015)
Sleep (2014)
Medicine (2012)
Sara Lee (2010)
Simple Rhymes (2009)
Lullabies or Lies (2007)
A Bad Think (2006)
Screwtop Wine (1995)
Familiar Dreams Panic (1991)


== See also ==
A Flock of Seagulls discography
Winnie Johnson-Marquart


== References ==


== External links ==
"A Bad Think official website".
"Windmark Recording official website".