Simone Menezes (born 22 January 1977) is an Italo-Brazilian conductor based in France.


== Early life ==
Menezes was born in Brasília. She studied piano, flute and conducting at the State University of Campinas (Unicamp). This university ranks first in the list of best universities in Latin America according to the British magazine Times Higher Education.)At the age of 20, she created her first orchestra, the young symphonic orchestra of Campinas – Unicamp. She obtained sponsorship from the Petrobras to develop the young orchestra, perform tours and record, subsequently going to Europe to study.
In 2007–2008, she obtained a scholarship to study at the École normale de musique de Paris where she was awarded her diploma after only one year of study. In parallel, she studied with Colin Metters in London and developed contemporary music repertoire while residing with the Remix Ensemble (Portugal) and Ensemble Multilatérale (Paris).
She also participated in masterclasses with Paavo Järvi, Neeme Järvi, Gennady Rozhdestvensky and Cláudio Cruz.


== Career ==
On her return to Brazil, from 2008 until 2012 she assumed the direction of the Unicamp Symphony Orchestra and became, after Ligia Amadio, only the second woman to be a conductor of a professional orchestra in Brazil. While at the orchestra of UNICAMP, her project "Panorama da Musica Brasileira" received the prize awarded by the São Paulo State Association of Critics. She developed several multidisciplinary projects including dance, music, technology and premiered more than 20 works.

In 2013, she founded and directed the "Camerata Latino Americana", an ensemble specialized in the interpretation of Latin American repertoire and attracted the attention of the ISPA International Society for the Performing Arts of New York and the Association of British Orchestras in London.
In 2014, she founded with the pianist Sonia Rubinsky the "Villa Lobos Project", a project dedicated to promoting the work of the composer Villa-Lobos and classical Brazilian music internationally; the development of a reflection on Brazilian identity in partnership with other artists, researchers and the general public; the realization of artistic and cultural projects such as concerts, masterclasses and publications.
Since 2014, she has been mentored by Paavo Järvi and works as his assistant on several projects.In 2016, she returned to France and began a career as a guest conductor working with orchestras such as the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra, The Orchester National d'Île-de-France, Orchester National des Pays-de-la-Loire, Orchester d'Auvergne, etc.In 2019, she was awarded second prize in the European competition MAWOMA (Master Woman Orchestra) for female orchestra conductors at the Musikverein in Vienna. In the same year, she made her Japanese debut with the Osaka Symphony Orchestra and Chofu International Music Festival.Considered to be an avant-gardist and an engaged personality, today there are around 4% women orchestra conductors in the world, Menezes was the second woman to be at the head of a professional orchestra in Brazil at a time when there were even less. She has always been engaged in numerous multidisciplinary projects and her style is considered as innovative. She has worked with composers such as: Thomas Ades, Esteban Benzecry, Lera Auerbach, Philippe Hersant. She has also been involved in projects such as EMESP / GURI – Youth Orchestra of the State of Sao Paulo, where she regularly conducted concerts in the Sala Sao Paulo 2014–2016. She also collaborates with the Let's project with Philharmonie de Paris.In 2019 she launched a new project called Ensemble K, an orchestral ensemble formed by musicians from several countries to explore unusual repertories and multi-disciplinary projects. The ensemble is based in Belgium and north of France.


== Personal life ==
Menezes is married since the age of 20 to the engineer Humberto Menezes and is the mother of Julia Menezes.


== Discography ==
2015 – Suíte Contemporânea Brasileira
2009 – Novos Universos Sonoros


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Villa Lobos Project website
https://www.ensemblek.com/