Ioana Cristina Goicea (born 6 November 1992 in Bucharest, Romania) is a Romanian-born violinist.
Goicea was born into a family of musicians. Her mother is the Romanian violinist Cristina Anghelescu. She studied at the Music Universities in Leipzig, Rostock and Hanover with Mariana Sîrbu, Petru Munteanu and Krzysztof Wegrzyn.Goicea has performed in Europe, America, New Zealand, Australia and Asia at concert venues such as the Concertgebouw Amsterdam, St Martin-in-the-Fields London, Melbourne Recital Centre, Romanian Athenaeum, Shanghai Concert Hall, the Slovak Philharmonic and the Townhall Auckland. As a soloist she has performed with the Belgian National Orchestra, the Auckland Philharmonia, the George Enescu Philharmonic Bucharest, the National Radio Orchestra Bucharest, the Indianapolis Symphony, the Antwerp Symphony Orchestra, Orchestre Royal de Chambre de Wallonie, the Beethoven Orchestra Bonn and the Baden-Baden Philharmonic.In addition to her career as a soloist, Goicea is also an active chamber musician. In 2015, together with pianist Andrei Banciu, she won Second Prize at the International Competition “Premio Trio di Trieste”. In 2016 she participated in the Chamber Music Academy of the Heidelberger Frühling Music Festival. In 2017 she was invited to the Hitzacker Festival and its Academy. In 2018 she took part in the Verbier Festival Academy.Ioana Cristina Goicea plays a G.B. Guadagnini Violin (Parma, 1761), on loan from the German Music Instrument Fund – Deutsche Stiftung Musikleben.Her debut CD „Recital“ together with pianist Andrey Gugnin was released in early 2019 on New Zealand's Atoll Records Label.


== Awards ==
2014: Laureate of Fritz Kreisler Competition in Vienna, Austria
2017: First Prize at Michael Hill International Violin Competition in New Zealand
2018: Laureate of the International Violin Competition of Indianapolis
2018: First Prize at the Deutscher Musikwettbewerb in Bonn, Germany
2019: Laureate of the Queen Elisabeth Competition in Brussels, Belgium


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ioana Cristina Goicea at The Violin Channel