Cole Bennett (born May 14, 1996) is an American business executive, videographer, and music video director. His multimedia company, Lyrical Lemonade, started in 2013 as an internet blog while he was in high school.


== Early life ==
Cole Bennett was born on May 14, 1996, in Plano, Illinois. He went to Plano High School and Oakley Therapeutic Boarding School. He dropped out of college to focus on his career in videography and hip hop music, something he wanted to do since childhood.


== Lyrical Lemonade ==
Bennett originally founded Lyrical Lemonade as an internet blog when he was a high school student in Plano, Illinois. His mother came up with the name of the blog and also gave him a video camera. He began directing music videos for local Chicago rappers, including Vic Mensa and Taylor Bennett, which he uploaded onto the Lyrical Lemonade channel, along with live show recaps, cyphers, documentaries and interviews.The channel then expanded into other sub-genres of hip hop beyond the local Chicago scene, such as the emerging Soundcloud rap sub-genre. In 2016 and early 2017, he gained early recognition, working with artists such as Famous Dex, Lil Pump, Smokepurpp and Ski Mask the Slump God. On April 7, 2017, he released his first short film, "Lone Springs". In August 2017, he directed the music video for the Lil Xan single, "Betrayed", which was certified Platinum by the RIAA in 2018. He later directed numerous music videos for hit songs, which include Ski Mask the Slump God's "BabyWipe", Lil Skies' "Red Roses" and "Nowadays" and YBN Nahmir's "Bounce Out with That".
In May 2018, he directed the music video for Chicago rapper Juice Wrld's "Lucid Dreams", which peaked at number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100. The video has surpassed 750 million views on YouTube, becoming his most popular video on the channel. He has since worked with mainstream figures in hip hop such as J. Cole, Wiz Khalifa, Kanye West, and Eminem.In March 2020, he directed the music video for Eminem's hit single "Godzilla". The video itself features cameos from Dr. Dre and Mike Tyson. It gained 13 million views in 24 hours. In December 2020, in his second collaboration with Eminem, Bennett directed the music video for the rapper's single "Gnat".


== Impact ==

Bennett's Lyrical Lemonade frequently promotes and contributes to the rise of upcoming rappers. Examples of this include Lil Pump, whose appearance on Lyrical Lemonade elevated his popularity to a certain extent. Other examples include Pump's friend and frequent collaborator Smokepurpp, Juice Wrld, Ski Mask the Slump God, YNW Melly, Lil Tecca, NLE Choppa, and Jack Harlow.Pitchfork named Ski Mask the Slump God's 2017 "Catch Me Outside" music video, which was directed by Bennett, one of their favorite music videos of the 2010s.


== Other ventures ==
Bennett has also ventured into creating merchandise and lemonade beverages under the Lyrical Lemonade name. He said, "I really want to compete with Minute Maid and all of the elite lemonade and juice companies and I really think we can do that."In February 2020, Lyrical Lemonade collaborated with Jordan Brand. The collection included an Aerospace 720 shoe, a hooded sweatshirt, and a long sleeve t-shirt. In April 2020, Lyrical Lemonade collaborated with streetwear brand FTP. The collection included a hooded sweatshirt, a t-shirt, and co-branded cans of lemonade.Bennett hosts a music festival called Summer Smash every year. It is presented by independent Chicago-based event production label SPKRBX.


== Videography ==


== References ==