Todd Wiseman Jr. (born July 15, 1987) is an American filmmaker and entrepreneur. Wiseman is the co-founder of Hayden5, New York based production company with credits to projects such as Knucklehead and The Exit Room, the latter of which Wiseman directed. He has directed and produced music videos for several artists, such as Juelz Santana, Mariah Carey, Benny Benassi, and Jussie Smollett. Wiseman has also been responsible for the production of video content for General Electric, Amazon, and other major brands.


== Life and career ==
Wiseman was born in Hollywood, Florida, the son of Todd Alan Wiseman, a television executive and inventor, and Robin (née Rollins), a school teacher. His parents both graduated from Florida State University. In 2005, Wiseman graduated from high school and enrolled in New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, where he began making short films, including Manifesto about the Iraq War. He received his Bachelor of Arts in Film and Television in 2009.Wiseman wrote, directed, and produced the sci-fi short film, The Exit Room starring Christopher Abbott, about a journalist who faces government execution during a future American Revolution. It was later nominated for Best Narrative Short at the Tribeca Film Festival in 2013.In 2015, Wiseman helped produce the American drama film, Knucklehead, starring Gbenga Akinnagbe, Alfre Woodard, and Amari Cheatom. The story of a man who attempted to cure himself of his mental disorders, earned Wiseman multiple awards including recognition at the American Black Film Festival.
Long Shot is a Netflix short documentary about a man building a case against accusations that he committed murder. The film produced by Wiseman, was released in 2017 and features Larry David. Sports Illustrated called the film a "must watch." Long Shot earned several film nominations, including an Emmy Nomination for Best Short Film.Lightningface, a short film starring Oscar Isaac, premiered in 2016 and was produced by Wiseman. The film debuted as a staff pick on Vimeo.In 2018, Bumble named Wiseman one of New York City's "most inspiring people."


=== Notable projects with Hayden5 ===
Wiseman co-founded the production company Hayden5 with Milos Silber in 2009. The video production company has produced prolific viral and commercial videos, including award-winning films, documentaries, and various television series.
In 2013, Hayden5 produced the acclaimed Camp Gyno commercial for Hello Flo, a subscription company delivering feminine hygiene products. Hours after the commercial went online, Adweek named it "Ad of the Day" and HuffPost called it the "Best Tampon Ad in the History of the World." Fast Company said the ad "adorably busts through the period, vagina barrier." Another commercial produced by Hayden5 for Hello Flo's First Moon Party, won two Webby Awards and was recognized at Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity in 2015.In 2014, Hayden5 produced Zipcar's viral I'd Tap That commercial series. This campaign received four medals at the 35th Annual Telly Awards, among other accolades.We Live This, a 2015 documentary short produced by Hayden5 was won first prize for Best Documentary Short at the Rhode Island International Film Festival, and was a Special Mention winner for Documentary Short at the Tribeca Film Festival.Fred Armisen starred in the 2015 short drama, George and the Vacuum in 2015. The film was nominated for Best Narrative Short at the Tribeca Film Festival and was produced by Hayden5.At the brink of the global COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, Hayden5 created the idea and term "Drop Kit" as it pertains to remote video production. Hayden5's Drop Kits are compiled of sterilized production equipment and have been used by the likes of 30 Rock, Facebook Rooms, and The History Channel.


== Filmography ==


=== Film & television ===


=== Music videos ===
List of music videos directed or produced by Todd Wiseman Jr.


== References ==


== External links ==
Todd Wiseman Jr. at IMDb
Hayden5 Official Website