Paul F. Murphy (born January 25, 1949) is a percussionist, bandleader and composer. He is best known for having led a variety of small jazz ensembles, and for his long tenure in groups led by saxophonist Jimmy Lyons.


== Career ==
Murphy began playing drums at a very early age, and made the acquaintance of Gene Krupa at age six. He went on to study with Krupa, Louis Bellson, and Joseph Levitt, the principal percussionist of the National Symphony Orchestra and director of the Peabody Conservatory.At age sixteen, Murphy began playing in the Washington, D.C. area with Duke Ellington's bassist Billy Taylor, who exposed him to the music of pianist Cecil Taylor. At Billy Taylor's advice, Murphy moved to San Francisco, where he established himself as a bandleader. While there, he met and befriended Cecil Taylor and Jimmy Lyons. At the suggestion of Lyons, he then moved to New York, where he managed Ali's Alley, a club run by drummer Rashied Ali, and began playing and recording with Lyons' groups as well as his own quintet. While in New York, Murphy immersed himself in both the experimental jazz and punk rock scenes.Following Lyons' untimely death in 1986, Murphy spent time playing drums in Las Vegas, then moved back to San Francisco, where he formed Trio Hurricane with saxophonist Glenn Spearman and bassist William Parker. He moved back to the Washington, D.C. area in 1990, and has since collaborated with pianists Joel Futterman and Larry Willis, poet Jere Carroll, and others.Murphy has been described as "a fluent, compositionally minded master drummer." One reviewer wrote "It is hard to believe that Murphy is actually moving through space as he moves from one part of the drum set to another because the action is seamless... Murphy uses every tool he has on every drum surface; hands, brushes, mallets and sticks on snare, tom, cymbals, bass and bongos. The drumming possesses substantial physicality even in its subtleties, and often an incredibly rapid and feather-light touch." Another reviewer described him as "a drummer/sound painter who totally trusts his wildest creative impulses."


== Discography ==


=== As leader ===
In a Dream Stream: Paul Murphy at CBS (Murphy Records, 1981) with Mary Anne Driscoll
Red Snapper: Paul Murphy At CBS (CIMP, 1982) with Jimmy Lyons, Dewey Johnson, Karen Borca, Mary Anne Driscoll
Cloudburst: Paul Murphy at RCA (Murphy Records, 1983) with Jimmy Lyons, Dewey Johnson, Karen Borca, Mary Anne Driscoll
Trio Hurricane: Suite Of Winds (Black Saint Records, 1986) with Glenn Spearman and William Parker
Trio Hurricane: Live At Fire In The Valley (Eremite Records, 1997) with Glenn Spearman and William Parker
Breakaway (Murphy Records, 2001) with Joel Futterman and Jere Carroll
Enarre (Cadence, 2002) with Joel Futterman and Kash Killion
Shadow * Intersections * West (Cadence, 2004) with Marco Eneidi and Kash Killion
Excursions (Murphy Records, 2007) with Larry Willis and Jere Carroll
Exposé (Murphy Records, 2008) with Larry Willis and Jere Carroll
Foundations (Murphy Records, 2009) with Larry Willis and Jere Carroll
Freedom's Bell (Murphy Records, 2017) with Larry Willis, Jere Carroll, and Dominic Fragman


=== As sideman ===
With Jimmy Lyons

Riffs (hat MUSICS, 1982)
Wee Sneezawee (Black Saint Records, 1984)
Give It Up (Black Saint Records, 1985)
Jimmy Lyons Box Set (Ayler Records, 2003)With Larry Willis

Sunshower (Mapleshade, 2001)
The Powers of Two (Mapleshade, 2004)
The Powers of Two, Volume 2 (Mapleshade, 2004)With Raphe Malik

Companions (Eremite Records, 2002)With Eddie Gale

A Minute With Miles (Mapleshade, 1992)With Mary Anne Driscoll

Inside Out (CIMP, 2004)With Kendra Shank

Afterglow (Mapleshade, 1994)With Windmill Saxophone Quartet

Touch of Evil (Mapleshade, 2002)Compilations

Vision Volume One: Vision Festival 1997 Compiled (AUM Fidelity, 1998)


== Documentaries ==
Inside Out in the Open


== References ==


== External links ==
"Paul F. Murphy and Dominic Fragman: A New Sound in Musical Expression"
"The Spirit of Jazz & Democracy"
"The Spirit of Innovation & Freedom"