Alina Boz (Cyrillic: Алина Боз; born 14 June 1998) is a Turkish-Russian actress and model. She is known for her role as Mahur Türel in Maraşlı opposite Burak Deniz and Eda in the Netflix series Aşk 101.


== Early life ==
Alina Boz was born on 14 June 1998 in Moscow, Russia. Her mother is Russian and her father is Turkish. Her paternal grandparents were among the Turk minority in Bulgaria and then immigrated from Bulgaria to Turkey (also known as Bulgarian Turk). Boz was seven when her family moved to Turkey due to her father's new job. There she learned Turkish and attended primary school. She speaks Turkish, Russian and English. She studied at Private Gökjet Aviation High School. She began her dance career in the dance theatre. Before starting her acting career, Boz worked as a model on commercials and magazines.


== Career ==
Boz started her acting career in the 2013 series Cesur Hemşire as Canan. In 2014, she made her debut in the series Paramparça and depicted the character of Hazal along with actress Nurgül Yeşilçay. In 2016, she appeared in the movie Kaçma Birader and portrayed the character of Melis Kahvaci. In 2017, Boz had a role in the movie Böluk and also worked in the series Sevdanın Bahçesi as Defne. In 2018, she was cast in the series Vatanım Sensin as Princess Anastasia Romanova, and in the same year she had a leading role as Azra Güneş in the series Elimi Bırakama.Boz had a leading role in the Netflix original series Aşk 101 and portrayed the character of "Eda". As of 2021, she is starring as Mahur Türel opposite Burak Deniz in the television series Maraşlı. In 2021, she signed a contract for the brand Duru, she received 1 million Turkish lira for the deal. The commercial was shot in Bursa. Simultaneously, Boz starred in the sequel of Aşk 101, which premiered on 30 September 2021 on Netflix. In 2021, she was cast in the movie Bandırma Füze Kulübü and depicted the leading female role of Leyla, the movie was set in the late 1950s and focused on a group of qualified students who began constructing missiles.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Alina Boz on Instagram
Alina Boz at IMDb