Alessio Sundas (born 2 December 1971) is an Italian sports agent and founder of Top Players Scouting, creator of Oracle Genius Soccer algorithm that rates the value of football players from 1 to 1000 through certified KPI data of players, media entrepreneur, author and television personality.  In 2003, Sundas established Gutenberg Publishing House, the publisher of Millennium Magazine and Cinque Terre Magazine. He established Miami Magic FC Academy in Miami, United States to train Americans European style of soccer play and negotiate transfer of players to Major League Soccer, MLS.  In February 2021, he negotiated the transfer of Brazilian player Alexandre Pato from São Paulo to Olando City in Major League Soccer.


== Early life and education ==
Alessio Sundas was born in Italy. Sundas early education was at Linguistic High School after which he proceeded to CEPLAT where he earned a degree in Physiotherapy specializing in sports with a licence to operate ligaments. Sundas later obtained a degree in Marketing and Communication in Milan.


== Career ==
Sundas television appearances started at the age of 19 when he first appeared in a program, Maurizio Costanzo Show. Later, Sundas appeared in Marta Flavi show on Canale 5 as a guest and Uomini e Donne TV show along with Maria De Filippi on same Canale 5.


== American Group Sports Management ==
Expanding his career to the United States in 2019, Sundas established American Group Sports Management one of the largest agencies in America that values Boca Raton footballers and players. It also broker exchange of footballers in European leagues with Major League Soccer (MLS) and other lower leagues in the US. In January 2021, the company made its first major deal in the MLS with the movement of Brazilian player Alenxdre  Pato to Orlando City FC.


== Agent career ==
In 2000, Sundas took a career in football and became Fifa agent and player manager. In 2015, Sundas was registered as a member of Italian sports agent and managed Dei Giovani. Later he extended his managerial services to women's football. Sundas managed the transfer of a Brazilian national player, Andressa Alves da Silva from FC Barcelona to AS Roma. Ferjani Sassi managed by Sundas played in the Russia 2018 FIFA World Cup for Tunisia national team.
In 2018, Sundas stated that he would find an entrepreneur who would buy and promote Salernitana club back to Serie A, with foreign players looking to play in European clubs, create women formation and an academy to develop young players for the club. This followed a pronouncement  by the club's co-founder that the Salernitana would be sold off if a buyer could be found after fans complained about the poor performance of the club in serie B.After discussion with Real Madrid's Sports Director, Secura to bring Lionel Messi to Italy to play in serie A club, Napoli was unsuccessful, Sundas initiated discussions with foreign clubs  for the transfer of goalkeeper Riccardo Piscitelli. In 2019, Sundas became the manager of the Italian-Tunisian goalkeeper, Aladin Ayoub who was playing in Serie B championship with Virtus Entella. In 2016, Sundas got Mattia Vaccaro registered with Napoli, where he received technical, tactical and athletic training until 2018/2019 season, when Sundas again moved Vaccaro to Ascoli for two years contract and was later proposed to CT Mancini. Sundas invented “Volarisation” (Enhancement) of players using technologies such VEO and GPS camera to record and analyze players’ strength and weakness which are then used to correct and improve players’ performance.  In August 2021, he launched Sundas Method App which allows players to create personalized technical sheet compiled through the processing of three videos by Match Analysis and Analysis Data experts. He invented Alessio Sundas Method (ASM) app for computing player performance data. ASM algorithm gives a value range from one to 1,000 on every player performance. The app is connected to technical and sports institutes for easy access to player’s real performance data.


== Select transfer deals ==


== References ==