Assia Ahhatt (real name  Inessa Assia Balenko; born June 3, 1965 in Kyiv, Ukraine) is a Ukrainian singer and violinist, Merited Artist of Ukraine (2018).
Ahhatt gained global recognition in 2013 with her first U.S. hit single "If Only Tonight" (3.5 million YouTube views, as of June 2021). Ahhatt's 2019 PBS concert show "A Music Extravaganza", which was recorded live at the National Opera of Ukraine, aired from June 2019 through early 2020.


== Early life and education ==
Assia Ahhatt was born in Kyiv.
Graduated from Glier College of Music and National Music Academy, both located in Kyiv, Ukraine. After graduation, she completed an internship at The Music Academy in Nice, France (French: Academie de musique de Nice).


== Career ==
A violin prodigy since age five, Ahatt won numerous European competitions, and was among the Ukrainian National Philharmonic’s youngest soloists ever.Ahhatt’s first solo release Homo Novus came in 1999 and introduced her favorite classical-style instrumental music set to her own arrangements, followed by a tour of major U.S. cities. The single appeared on numerous U.S. charts, including Billboard’s Hot Single Chart (#6 in Billboard’s 2014 - Singles Chart).
In 2002, Ahhatt turned her trained voice to singing and signed contracts with EMI records (Poland) and then Universal Poland, where she recorded the duet "Where Are You Now?" with Polish-born Hollywood actor Bogusław Linda — who  also starred in the video. The song was an instant hit in Europe.
That same year, Ahhatt signed a contract with Universal/Ukrainian Records, who released the album "Tebe, Anais" (For You, Anais).
The album Chocolad (Chocolate) was released in 2003, showcasing Ahhatt's global appeal with songs performed in Russian, Polish and French.
In her 2005 album "Душа болела" (Soul Hurts), Ahhatt included a vocal performance of Dreams in a self-created language that only she knows.
In 2005, Ahhatt co-founded music group 69, expanding her role to producer and co-writer. The group's albums "Горячий поцелуй" (Hot Kiss) and "I Like It" were released in 2006.
2007 saw Ahhatt release another solo album, "Я лучшая" (I Am the Best), followed by 2010's "Ангелы не курят" (Angels Don't Smoke).
In 2011, Ahhatt turned her creative focus to modern violin music and recorded her chart-topping U.S. debut single "If Only Tonight". The recording received recognition by DRT National Airplay in the Indie, R&B, and Hip Hop categories, reaching #6 on Billboard's singles chart, as well as being featured on their National Dance Club Chart for several weeks. A remix by DJ Ralphi Rosario was a hit in dance clubs and discos across the U.S., and was on Billboard's National Dance Club Chart for several consecutive weeks.
After the success of "If Only Tonight", Ahhatt turned her attention to Latin sounds, pairing up with Puerto Rican rapper Wisin to record Fiesta in San Juan, a dynamic, bilingual dance number with a towering violin solo. Both artists appear in the song's popular video, which was filmed in Old San Juan and produced and directed by the Jessy Terrero. Fiesta in San Juan made Billboard's Latin Tropical Chart, and the remix is nearing the Top 10 on Billboard's National Dance Club Chart.Ahhatt's evolution continued as she transformed into a pop performer who uses both her violin and her voice. The award-winning single Disco, produced by Dmytro Monatyk of Chilibisound, was released in 2016, and in April 2017 Assia debuted her single "Переплетает" to an audience in her home city of Kyiv. Her next single was 2017's "You Will Miss Me", recorded at Hit Factory Criteria in Miami and produced by Luny Tunes.
The artist considers her 2018 album "All In" to be among the biggest achievements of her career, recorded on her own label Seize the Day Entertaining in partnership with multiple Grammy winner Humberto Gatica, who also produced the album and show of Ahhatt's PBS show A Music Extravaganza. All In's 13 international hits feature Assia's violin solos, backed by a full orchestra.


== Videography ==
Assia's PBS concert show "A Music Extravaganza" was recorded live at the National Opera of Ukraine, directed by producer Gene Bortnick. The show was a huge hit in national airings (June 2019 to early 2020).


== Discography ==
1999 — Homo Novus
2002 — To You, Anais
2003 — Chocolate
2005 — Soul Hurts
2006 — Hot Kisses, I Like It
2007 — I Am the Best
2010 — Angels Don't Smoke
2013 — If Only Tonight
2014 — Fiesta in San Juan
2016 — Disco
2017 — You Will Miss Me, Perepletaet, All-In
2019 — A Music Extravaganza (Live-In concert and album)
2020 — A Date at the Movies


== References ==


== External links ==
"About the artist - Assia Ahhatt".Assia Ahhatt on Facebook
"Assia Ahhatt - YouTube". YouTube.