Jeremiah Martin Green (born March 4, 1977) is an American musician best known as a founding member and drummer of the indie rock band Modest Mouse from 1993 to March 2003, and again from July 2004 to present.


== Biography ==
He was born in Oahu, Hawaii, while his father was in the Army. He grew up in Moxee, Washington, a few miles outside of Yakima. His family moved to the Seattle area in 1989. He has an older brother named Adam, a half sister named Theresa, and a stepsister. He is married to Lauren Green, owner of Thuja in downtown Port Townsend, and their son Wilder was born in 2016.
In the mid-1990s, Green also played with the bands Satisfact on K Records, Red Stars Theory on Touch and Go Records, and Peeved on Distressed Records. Green also plays with a band by the name of Vells, as well as another band named Psychic Emperor. Both bands play at venues around Seattle and the Pacific Northwest.
Green can speak a little Japanese, as shown on track 6 of Night on the Sun.
In May 2008, Green released a drum breaks 7" collaboration with Plastiq Phantom under the alias World Gang on the Imputor? label.
In 2007, Green appeared on Graig Markel's "Via Novella" on the Sonic Boom Label.


== Style and influence ==
Of his work on Sad Sappy Sucker, Spencer Owen at Pitchfork Media has said, "Jeremiah Green proves himself to be one of indie rock's best drummers, even this early on in the game."1In an interview with drummer Benjamin Weikel, who briefly replaced Green during the latter's hiatus from Modest Mouse, he states that Green's drum parts have a "great, loose feeling that's hard to emulate".[1]
He placed 37th in Stylus Magazine's list of "50 Greatest Rock Drummers", where Jonathan Bradley describes his drumming: His rhythms can be as unkempt and intricate as the music they underpin (the rolling shuffle of "Grey Ice Water," or the stumbling clatter of "Truckers Atlas," for instance), but they are always strong enough to bolster the momentum of even the most meandering tracks. And when presented with a genuine groove, like the lean, funky "Tiny Cities Made of Ashes," he forces the band to march in lockstep behind him.[2]


== References ==


== External links ==
World Gang @ Imputor? Records
Psychic Emperor official site
Vell's MySpace
Graig Markel's official site