Charles White Jr. (born August 2, 1994), better known as Cr1TiKaL (pronounced "critical"), is an American YouTuber and Twitch streamer. He became popular for his video game commentary videos on his "penguinz0" YouTube channel, mainly known for his monotone voice and deadpan delivery of humorous commentary. He has gained significant coverage over the following years of his online career.In 2018, White began streaming live on Twitch, where he mainly streams gaming content. White co-owns Human Media Group, a multi-channel network that serves online content creators and entertainers.As of February 2022, White's YouTube channel has gained over 4.8 billion video views and over 10 million subscribers; his Twitch channel has gained over 3.5 million followers and over 53 million views.


== Internet career ==


=== Early years and content evolution (2006–2017) ===
White started making YouTube videos in 2006, when he uploaded music and AMVs to his old channels. He created his penguinz0 YouTube channel on May 7, 2007. On August 5, he uploaded his first non-deleted video, which featured gameplay of Gears of War. During this time, he streamed live on Justin.tv from late 2009 to early 2010.White's audience rapidly grew after he uploaded a video titled The Most Difficult Game Ever Created Gameplay and Commentary, in which he commentates while playing the online game QWOP and calls it "the hardest game he had ever played". The video gained popularity after Ray William Johnson reviewed it on his series Equals Three, in which he praises White's sense of humor. In 2013, White was cited by Tubefilter as panning YouTube's new comment system, which required a Google+ account to leave comments on videos.In 2012, White expressed his desire to donate all of his YouTube earnings to charity. Later that year, he announced he had signed a partnership with Maker Studios and had set up a Twitter account to disclose his charity donations. On September 2, 2014, he made a video expressing his gratitude to his fandom for helping him reach the one-million-subscriber milestone and said he has donated over $50,000 from his YouTube earnings to charity.In 2015, after eight years of anonymity, White made his Snapchat username, "big_moist", public, revealing his face. He uploaded his first video showing his face on camera on March 5, 2017.In early 2015, White began speaking about various topics, including internet drama. He drew attention from media outlets for his commentary videos, which were often of discourse about online platforms and considerably critical of YouTube's policies.In December 2016, White began co-hosting The Official Podcast with fellow Internet personalities ZealotOnPC, Huggbees, and Kaya Orsan.Media outlets sparsely referenced White's gameplay videos; his 2015 video on Ark: Survival Evolved was referenced by The Daily Star. The Daily Dot wrote that White is known for his "sardonic commentary." In February 2016, The Guardian included his video reaction to the Fine Brothers' React World controversy in their coverage of the situation. Kotaku referenced White's 2017 video demonstrating character customization in Mass Effect: Andromeda.


=== Twitch live streaming and continued growth (2018–present) ===
White continued to make content discussing events in online platforms and their communities. In January 2018, White addressed YouTube, which removed his video discussing Logan Paul's suicide forest controversy.By March 2018, White's YouTube channel had two million subscribers. In May, White's video featuring a pit of 5,400 balls, which he made for his husky Tetra, went viral; the Press Association interviewed him about it and media outlets reported it.In 2018, White began streaming live on Twitch. In March 2020; due to COVID-19 lockdown measures, he co-hosted an online Super Smash Bros. Ultimate tournament on his Twitch channel with fellow YouTuber Alpharad.In late 2020, White's popularity grew due to his Twitch streams about chess and Among Us with popular streamers such as Sykkuno, Pokimane, Nigahiga, Valkyrae, Trainwreckstv, and Disguised Toast. In June, White participated in the first PogChamps chess tournament, which Chess.com hosted. He won "one of the more anticipated games" in the tournament, beating fellow Twitch streamer xQc in six moves. According to Dot Esports, the game was one of the five "biggest moments in streaming from 2020" and the clip of White's victory became one of the most-viewed in Twitch history, gaining over 1.9 million views by December 24, 2020. White won the tournament's consolation bracket.In late October, White participated in U.S. Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's Among Us live streams.In November 2020, White made a video on his Twitch stream announcing he had raised $14,000 to pay for surgery on two dogs, and that he contributed $3,000, bringing the total to $17,000.In November, White signed a contract with BroadbandTV Corp (BBTV) to become a content partner with the company. Also in November, White spoke in a YouTube video about an increase in Twitch's DMCA crackdowns. In December, White participated in a "Pokémon Week" event on Twitch in which several creators hosting streams in which they opened boxes of Pokémon cards.In January 2021, White began hosting a game show titled Hivemind with fellow streamer Ludwig Ahgren on Twitch.On February 22, 2021, former YouTuber MaximilianMus deleted his YouTube channel after White labeled him "the worst YouTuber" in one of his videos, in which he criticized him for maliciously raiding Twitch channels and claimed that his audience had shared child pornography via Discord servers and his subreddit. In May of that year, MaximilianMus restored his channel and accused White of slander.On April 29, 2021, White hosted a charity event for Cure Rare Disease on his Twitch channel, with fellow YouTuber Jacksepticeye being a guest with a personal donation of $10,000. In October 2021, White participated in a Nickelodeon All-Star Brawl charity tournament hosted by Alpharad and Coney of Panda Global.


== Other ventures ==
White and Troy McKubre of the band Solstate started a musical duo named The Gentle Men. The duo started producing music in 2019 with a string of singles. The duo released their debut studio album, The Evolution of Tears, on September 5, 2021.In 2019, White co-founded Human Media Group, an American multi-channel network, with his friend Matt. The network provides brand deals and legal teams to online content creators.On July 5, 2021, White announced the launch of a graphic novel series titled GODSLAP, which he wrote with author Stephanie Phillips and artist Ricardo Jaime, and was published by Meatier Productions. White expressed interest in the expansion of the series beyond comics, and hinted at an animated adaptation that was being produced.On August 11, 2021, White announced a new esports organization named Moist Esports. Super Smash Bros. Ultimate player Kolawole "Kola" Aideyan became the first player to join, and won a tournament under the name "Moist Kola".


== Personal life ==
White was born on August 2, 1994, in Tampa, Florida. White is currently not religious, although he had profound religious beliefs during his childhood. He attended Carrollwood Day School and was a member of the varsity basketball team. White had recurrent pneumothorax in his left lung, which collapsed three times before he underwent surgery in 2011. White suffered from obsessive–compulsive disorder during his teenage years and performed "weird rituals" due to it. He attended The University of Tampa and graduated with a bachelor's degree in human sciences.White currently lives in Tampa, Florida. He has been in a relationship with Tiana Tracy since 2016, and together they own two dogs.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Web ===


=== Podcast ===


== Games ==


== Bibliography ==
Swan, Genghis (2017). The Man Who Forgot How to Poop. Chris Metzner. CreateSpace. ISBN 978-1977639738.


== See also ==
List of YouTubers
List of most-followed Twitch channels


== References ==


== External links ==
Cr1TiKaL's channel on YouTube
Cr1TiKaL on Twitch
Cr1TiKaL on TikTok
Cr1TiKaL at IMDb