Grace Semler Baldridge (born 12 November 1990) is an American musician and media host. They release music as Semler.


== Biography ==
Baldridge's father is a priest in the Episcopal Church. They spent their early life in Delaware but their family moved to Waterloo, Belgium when they were in third grade, . They returned to the US to attend Elon University.Baldridge is queer. They met their future wife Elizabeth Capel during their time at Elon University. The two married in August 2018 in an Episcopalian ceremony, and the couples' wedding was featured in an episode of the Refinery29 series World Wide Wed. Their Twitter post giving coming out advice to themself as a teenager attracted national attention.As of 2021, Grace and Lizzie Baldridge live in Los Angeles, California. They describe themselves as "a faithfully skeptical Christian".Baldridge is genderqueer and non-binary, and has stated that "all pronouns are totally fine".


== Music ==
Baldridge writes and records music as Semler. The name was chosen both because of the name's links to their maternal family history and because they prefer their music to be experienced from a gender-neutral viewpoint.In February 2021 they released an EP, Preacher's Kid, about being a queer Christian, which they recorded at home and promoted themselves.  Shortly after release it reached the top of the iTunes Christian chart, supplanting Lauren Daigle's Look Up Child. Michel Martin interviewed Baldridge about Preacher's Kid for NPR in March 2021, discussing their faith and music and playing single 'Jesus from Texas'. The album earned support from some figures in the Christian music industry including  Kevin Max, Trey Pearson, Derek Webb, Josh Lovelace and Lecrae.Their second EP, titled Late Bloomer, was released on October 22, 2021. Like its predecessor, it reached first place on the iTunes Christian charts, once again displacing Lauren Daigle's Look Up Child.


== Media presenting ==
Baldridge has been a regular guest host of The Young Turks, and co-hosted the former TYT Network show Pop Trigger. She created and hosts the TYT-associated YouTube series Murder with Friends, which was nominated for Best Non-Fiction Series in the 7th Streamy Awards in 2017.In 2020, Baldridge hosted a documentary series entitled 'State of Grace' on being LGBTQ and Christian, produced by Refinery29. The first episode, "The Life Threatening Dangers Of Gay Conversion Therapy", was nominated at the 31st GLAAD Media Awards for the Outstanding Digital Journalism - Multimedia award.


== External links ==
Grace Baldridge on Twitter
Semler Music


== References ==