Aisa Hakimcan (Tatar pronunciation: [dʒan], aka Aisja Hakimsan in Finland, March 13, 1896 - November 5, 1972) was a Tatar artist, publisher and a leader who contributed in the Tatar community of Tampere.


== Biography ==
Aisa Hakimcan was originally from a Nizhny Novgorod Governorate village called Aktuk. He came to Finland in 1917.Hakimcan, like many other Tatars of his generation made a living as a merchant, but among the Tatar community in Tampere, he was mostly known as a tough leader and a versatile artist. He was involved in the founding of local Islamic congregation, and later worked at the board. He was also the chairman of The Tampere Turkish Society in late 1940s, and vice chairman multiple times.As an artist, Hakimcan could play multiple instruments. He also operated as a choir director and theater director. The plays he was known for were called Aliye Banu and Asıl Yar. At times, he also acted himself. His voice has been described as very melodic, which was not only fitting for singing, but also for giving Tarawih prayers during Ramadan.In addition, Hakimcan was a poet. One of his works reads as follows; (Tatar) "Bılmesem il dertlerın, min bulay yazmas idım. Milletımni söymesem, kulıma kalem almas idım." (English translation): "If i did not know the sufferings of my people, i would not express my feelings in writing. I would not take a pen in my hand, if i did not love my people". Given text was found in a three part publication, which consisted of works of the community, collected and published by Hakimcan in 1950s.In late 1960s, Hakimcan also published together with imam Habibur-Rahman Shakir a booklet in honor of the Tatar poet Ğabdulla Tuqay. With merchant Semiulla Wafin he published a work that focused on Islam.In 1938, a 20-year memorial service for Idel Ural State was held in Warsaw, organized by Tatar activist Ayaz Ishaki. Hakimcan was one of the seven Finnish Tatars who took part in the celebration. Others from the community were for example businessman Ymär Sali and teacher Gibadulla Murtasin.The Tatar community of Tampere has told that Hakimcan had a lifelong yearning for his childhood village. Three years before his death however, he got a chance to travel to Kazan, where he for example visited the grave of the poet Tuqay.


== Personal life ==
Aisa Hakimcan had a daughter Aliye, who was active in the Tatar theater scene and a son, hockey player Räshid Hakimsan. He had two older brothers, Ibrahim and Siddik.


== Selected work as a publisher ==
Kisäk millī ši`ïr vä ğïrlar (1956-1966) 
Abdulla Tukay (1966) 
Islām dīne ḥaqq dīnder 


== Selected plays ==
Zöleyha (1932, actor) 
Aliye Banu (1934, actor) 
Aliye Banu (1946, director) 
Asıl Yar (1949, director) 


== References ==