Lainey Wilson (born May 19, 1992) is an American country music singer–songwriter. Wilson performed from an early age, before going to Nashville, Tennessee to pursue a career as a country performer. In 2014, she released her first album, followed by a second on the Lone Chief label in 2016. Wilson secured a publishing deal and later released an extended play (EP) in 2019, which included the song "Things a Man Oughta Know". In 2020, it was issued as a single through the BBR Music Group and eventually reached number one on the American country songs chart.


== Early life ==
Wilson was raised in Baskin, Louisiana, a town of only 300 people. Her father was a farmer while her mother was a schoolteacher. She became interested in music from an young age. Her family often listened to classic country music by Buck Owens and Glen Campbell. "Country music for me and my family, it was more than music. We lived the words to those songs," she told The Advocate. At age nine, she attended a performance of the Grand Ole Opry and was drawn to the music. "I just remember looking up there, being like, ‘Man, I wanna do that'," she recalled. Wilson's father taught her a couple chords and she was soon writing her songs by her preteen years. In 2006, she released an extended play (EP) on Myspace titled Country Girls Rule. In high school, Wilson took a job impersonating Hannah Montana. Often booking her own shows, she took jobs touring as Hannah Montana across Louisiana.


== Career ==


=== 2011–2018: Early years in Nashville and independent releases ===
Wilson finished high school and moved to Nashville, Tennessee in August 2011. She first lived in a trailer outside of a recording studio in Nashville. The studio owner paid for Wilson's water and electricity to help make ends meet. In 2021, Wilson explained that her early years in Nashville were difficult: "It taught me that this thing was not going to be easy. It taught me perseverance." For several years, Wilson played a variety of small shows and worked on her songwriting. In 2014, Wilson released a self-titled album on the Culpit label. It was followed in 2016  by her second album Tougher. The disc was released on the Lone Chief label. The project garnered an audience and charted the Billboard Top Country Albums list in 2016. In 2018, she issued her second EP, a self-titled collection that was self-released. This led to Wilson signing a publishing deal with SONY/ATV in 2018. The same year, she also signed a management deal.


=== 2019–present: Breakout success with "Things a Man Oughta Know" ===
In 2018, Wilson signed a major-label recording contract with the BBR Music Group. Her first major-label release was her third EP Redneck Hollywood (2019). Her debut major label single was also released in 2019 called "Dirty Looks". Off the Record UK praised the EP, highlighting Wilson's songwriting and the production from producer Jay Joyce. The publication concluded by saying, "The EP is raw and real, pushing the country music genre wider than ever and bringing it back to the traditional while still reinventing it to its modern surroundings." Wilson then received attention from Country Music Television, who included her in their "Listen Up" Class of 2019 and on their "2019 CMT Next Women of Country" tour. She also toured with Morgan Wallen in 2019. During this same period, several of her songs were featured in the Paramount Network show Yellowstone.In August 2020, the BBR label issued Wilson's next single to radio titled "Things a Man Oughta Know". The track gained heavy media attention from sites like Apple Music, iHeart Radio, Spotify and Pandora. By 2021, "Things a Man Oughta Know" became her breakout single, reaching number three on the Billboard Country Airplay chart and number one on the Country Songs chart. It was included on her third studio album Sayin' What I'm Thinkin' (2021). The disc was her first full-length album collection issued on the BBR label and contained 12 tracks. It was her second to reach the Billboard country albums list, peaking at number 40. The disc received positive reviews. "Beyond writing and recording songs that satisfy country music fans, she succeeds at introducing her whole self through the music," concluded Taste of Country's Billy Dukes. Entertainment Focus commented, "The rising star knocks it out of the park with her new album."Wilson appeared as a supporting act on Jason Aldean's "Back in the Saddle Tour" in 2021. In 2021, Cole Swindell asked to have Wilson collaborate on his next single. She agreed and in 2021, the pair released the duet "Never Say Never".


== Musical style and influences ==
Wilson's musical style is rooted in country music, but also incorporates elements of pop, southern rock, contemporary country and classic country. In describing her style, AllMusic's Mark Deming commented, " Wilson's voice is clear and strong, with an unapologetic Southern accent, and her songs are tough but heartfelt contemporary country with an edge that has its roots in vintage Southern rock and classic rock, as well as a dash of modern-day pop." In describing her own musical style, Wilson characterized it as "bell-bottom country", which Taste of Country called "a cross between easy listening and hard truths." Wilson has been heavily influenced by Dolly Parton, paying tribute to her in the self-composed track "WWDD" (What Would Dolly Do). She also credits Lee Ann Womack as an influence on her career and music.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Lainey Wilson (2014)
Tougher (2016)
Sayin' What I'm Thinkin' (2021)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website