Celestine Cruz Gonzaga-Soriano (born January 20, 1984), better known as Toni Gonzaga, is a Filipina singer, host, actress, producer, vlogger and entrepreneur.


== Personal life ==
Toni Gonzaga is a resident of Taytay, Rizal and the eldest daughter of former punong barangay, councilor and vice mayor Carlito "Bonoy" and Crisanta "Pinty" (née Cruz) Gonzaga, who also acts as her talent manager. Her sister, Catherine "Cathy" Gonzaga, professionally known as Alex Gonzaga, is also an actress and television host. In Taytay, she was an elected Barangay Kagawad for one term and a Sunday school teacher in Taytay United Methodist Church. She studied mass communication at the Dominican College in San Juan for two years. Later, she transferred to the Asian Institute for Distance Education (AIDE) and shifted her major to AB English, which she wasn't able to finish due to her busy showbiz schedule. She is currently enrolled at the University of the Philippines Open University taking up her bachelor's degree in multimedia studies. Gonzaga is an active member of the United Methodist Church.On February 1, 2015, Gonzaga announced her engagement to director Paul Soriano, her boyfriend of eight years, on The Buzz and married on June 12, 2015, at 3 p.m. at the United Methodist Church in Taytay, Rizal. In February 2016, a source announced that the couple was expecting their first child, due in late 2016 or early 2017. Gonzaga herself confirmed the announcement on ASAP on April 17, 2016. Gonzaga gave birth to their son, Severiano Elliott, on September 30, 2016.


==== Relationship on Bongbong Marcos ====
Marcos Jr. was Gonzaga's wedding godfather after she tied the knot with Soriano and because of that, she invited and interviewed him on an episode of her vlog, Toni Talks, titled “The Greatest Lesson Bongbong Marcos Learned From His Father”.The video earned Gonzaga praises from other people and underwhelming criticisms as netizens accused her of historical revisionism on the part they talk about Martial Law on the interview and they started to cancel her, however some people considered that move as not a good choice as they made her more influential to Filipinos. As a result of it, many opposition groups condemned the said interview and challenged Gonzaga to interview Martial Law victims.Months after Marcos announced his candidacy for presidency on October 5, 2021, Gonzaga and her husband, Paul Soriano publicly supports him amid backlash.On February 8, 2022, she was invited to become a host to the proclamation rally of Marcos-Duterte tandem in Philippine Arena. The backlash against her became much stronger after she introduced one of the key people to the closure of Gonzaga's home network, ABS-CBN, Rep. Rodante Marcoleta which running for the senatorial race.It made people to return on her 2020 statement against politicians who close their network, to express disgust and disappointment on her. As the result of the backlash and criticisms, on February 9, Gonzaga resigns as one of the main host of PBB, thanking them for their support. Following her resignment, she unfollowed her celebrity friends on Instagram.


== Career ==


=== 1997–2004: Career beginnings ===
Gonzaga started in local entertainment at the age of 13. It was in 1997 where she joined a singing competition called "Metropop Star Search", which was then aired on GMA. Two other Filipina singers, Kyla and Faith Cuneta, started their career on the singing competition television show. Gonzaga did win the competition.
Gonzaga's biggest break in the entertainment industry was her Sprite TV ad with Piolo Pascual in 2001. In the same year, she released her eponymous debut album under Prime Music and "Paano", a cover of Gary Valenciano's, was released as its carrier single. In 2002, she became one of the main hosts in the long-time afternoon variety show Eat Bulaga. She also sang "Doon", the theme song of TAPE, Inc.'s afternoon TV drama on GMA, Ikaw Sa Puso Ko which starred StarStruck finalist, Nadine Samonte and Oyo Boy Sotto. In 2002, she was cast in the primetime television series Habang Kapiling Ka starring Angelika dela Cruz. In March 2004, she joined Studio 23's Wazzup Wazzup with Archie Alemania and Vhong Navarro.


=== 2005–2008: Breakthrough with ABS-CBN ===
In January 2005, Gonzaga transferred to ABS-CBN, and became a host of the Pinoy Big Brother series and the Sunday musical variety program ASAP. In the same year, she starred as a lead in her first comedy-horror film, D' Anothers in which Vhong Navarro was her love interest. In 2006, she released her second album and her first under Star Records entitled Toni: You Complete Me and starred in her first prime time drama series Crazy for You opposite Luis Manzano. Her film You Are the One with Sam Milby was released the same year upon which she was awarded by the Guillermo Mendoza Memorial Foundation, Inc. (GMMSF) the following year for the said film. In 2007, Gonzaga released her third studio album Falling in Love and film You Got Me!. In 2008, she had her first solo major concert at the Aliw Theater titled "Catch Me, Toni Gonzaga: First Major Concert" which had a repeat the same year. After the success of her first major concert, she released her fourth studio album, Love Is.... Later, she launched her fourth film, My Big Love, her third with Sam Milby. After the blockbuster team up of Gonzaga and Milby, she once again starred opposite Vhong Navarro in the film My Only Ü.


=== 2009–2011: Subsequent success ===
In 2009, Gonzaga starred in a Valentine's Day Special episode of Maalaala Mo Kaya, the longest-running drama anthology on Philippine television and in Asia. She was then cast in the Gideon Flame Film Festival's Best Film, A Journey Home. Later in February, a duet album with Sam Milby was released under Star Records. Before the year ended, Gonzaga was once again teamed up with Sam Milby in the comedy film, Ang Tanging Pamilya: A Marry Go Round which included Ai-Ai de las Alas and Former Philippine President Joseph Estrada as the main leads. In 2010, she became part of entertainment talk show program The Buzz. She is the SM Cinema's Box Office Queen for 2010 alongside John Lloyd Cruz as the Box Office King for their film My Amnesia Girl. Her 5th studio album, All Me, was internationally released in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Korea, and Japan.
In August 2011, her film Wedding Tayo, Wedding Hindi, her first ever team up with Eugene Domingo, premiered in cinemas nationwide in the Philippines. On September 30, 2011, she celebrated her 10th anniversary in Philippine entertainment industry with a concert at the Smart Araneta Center titled "Toni@10" with guests Piolo Pascual, John Lloyd Cruz, Vhong Navarro, Pokwang, Vice Ganda, Sam Milby, her real-life sister Alex Gonzaga, with the special participation of Gary Valenciano. TAG Concept, the production and talent management group owned by the Gonzaga family, co-produced the show with Star Events and Epic Entertainment. Furthermore, for the continuation of the celebration, she released her Greatest Hits album in which her singles from 2006 to 2010 were included.


=== 2012–2014: Critical acclaim ===
In March 2012, Gonzaga starred in the first ever month-long special of Wansapanataym, which aired four episodes.The 2011 Female Concert Performer award was given to Gonzaga by the Guillermo Mendoza Memorial Foundation. In October 2012, Gonzaga finally launched her comedy film in which she teamed up with Vice Ganda and Luis Manzano entitled, This Guy's in Love With You, Mare!. The movie is one of the highest grossing Filipino films of all time, earning P315 million when it reached its third week of showing in cinemas nationwide. Moreover, she was awarded Best Female TV Host for her show, ASAP 2012, by the PMPC Star Awards before 2012 ended.On January 7, 2013, Gonzaga entered the Himig Handog P-Pop Love Songs contest with the song entry called "Kahit Na", written by Jumbo "Bojam" De Belen. The contest featured songwriters who worked together with Filipino artists to create new OPM music. The song was simultaneously promoted by Star Records Inc. as it was chosen as one of the 12 Grand Finalists. The music video of the said song was produced by the University of the Philippines. She performed the song during the grand finals on February 24 at the SM Mall of Asia Arena. Overall, the song finished in fifth place as the Best P-pop Love Song, thus rewarding the writer of Gonzaga's song ₱100,000 in cash.In February 2013, Gonzaga confirmed that she was the main host of the singing reality show The Voice of the Philippines. As part of the 20th anniversary celebration of Star Cinema, Gonzaga starred with Bea Alonzo, Shaina Magdayao, Angel Locsin and Enchong Dee in Cathy Garcia-Molina's Four Sisters and a Wedding. In June 2013, she hosted Kwentong Kusina, Kwentong Buhay, a cooking show which aired every Sunday morning for 10 episodes. On October 8, 2013, Gonzaga won "Best Female Emcee" at the 26th Aliw Awards. By the end of the year, she is set to host the 5th season of Pinoy Big Brother. Her 2014 film Starting Over Again was a hit at the box office. She released her sixth studio album called, Celestine while Home Sweetie Home, a sitcom with John Lloyd Cruz, is already airing during Saturday night. Continuing her album promotion, she guested on Myx as a Celebrity MYX VJ for the month of July, and supported by a concert called Celestine Toni Gonzaga set on October 3, 2014, at Mall of Asia Arena. As well as a reality co-host with her real-life sister, Alex Gonzaga, entitled Team Gonzaga which exclusively view in ABS-CBN mobile. "This Love Is Like" and "Awit ni Ginny" have been released in MYX and YouTube.


=== 2015–present: Recent work ===
In 2015, Star Cinema had produced a Coco Martin and Gonzaga film entitled, You're My Boss. In April 2015, Gonzaga renewed her contract with ABS-CBN Corporation. She announced that she will reprise her role as the host of Pinoy Big Brother: 737, which premiered on June 20, 2015.Earlier of 2016, she was introduced as one of the HIMIGration officers (judges) of the original concept reality show of ABS-CBN, I Love OPM, together with Lani Misalucha and Martin Nievera, and hosted by Anne Curtis.
In 2017, she starred in a dark romance drama with Piolo Pascual entitled Last Night. A film of her and her sister Alex Gonzaga with Sam Milby, entitled Mary, Marry Me came out on December 25, 2018.


== Filmography ==


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Compilation albums ===


=== Participated albums ===


=== Concerts ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Toni Gonzaga on Facebook
Toni Gonzaga on Instagram
Toni Gonzaga at IMDb