Francisca Viveros Barradas, (born April 2, 1947) known professionally as Paquita la del Barrio ("Paquita From the Neighborhood") is a Mexican singer, songwriter, and actress. She is a Grammy nominated singer of rancheras and other Mexican genres.


== Career ==
Paquita started her career in Mexico City in 1970. She performed at a local restaurant in Colonia Guerrero, where fans returned every week to listen to her music. It is here where she gained her stage name. Her big break came in 1986, where she performed in a Televisa show that exposed her to a bigger audience and led to a recording contract with CBS. Her songs usually take a stance against Mexico's sexist male culture. This has made her popular among female audiences. She is known for her often confrontational presence; her signature phrase, with which she often teases male spectators in her shows, is "¿Me estás oyendo, inútil?" ("Are you listening to me, you good-for-nothing?"). In the 2021 Billboard Music Awards, when Bad Bunny went to the stage to help her with mic, she told him Eres un inutil. In an interview with The Miami Herald Paquita said, "I am defending women. It is very important. I am a woman. I speak of my experiences." Her best-known song is "Rata de dos patas" (Eng: "Two-legged rat"), in which she compares an ex-lover to a variety of vermin and other untrustworthy animals. The song was included in her album by the same name. Many of Paquita's albums and songs are jukebox staples in Mexican clubs and cantinas. Paquita's influences stemmed from ranchera music and singers like Antonio Aguilar and Pedro Infante. Many admirers, particularly outside Mexico, also appreciate her for her camp value.
Paquita duets with singer Ricardo Arjona on "Ni Tu Ni Yo" on his album 5to Piso (2008). She also performed at the Premios Lo Nuestro and participated in the "Somos El Mundo" the Spanish version of "We Are The World." She was honored with the Trajectory Award at the Premio lo Nuestro awards (2016). She also received the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2021 Billboard Latin Music AwardsPaquita la del Barrio has inspired a television series on Univision.  The series, Paquita la del Barrio, follows the fictional life story behind the Mexican singer. Paquita stated that it was difficult to watch a story of her life, but was pleased that her story was being told.


=== Nominations ===
Her album Romeo Y Su Nieta earned her a nomination for the 56th Annual Grammy Awards (2013) under Best Regional Mexican Music Album (Including Tejano).


== Personal life ==
She was born in Alto Lucero, Veracruz.
When she was fifteen years old she eloped with forty-four year old Miguel Magaña. Her marriage with Magaña lasted seven years and she had two sons. Her first marriage ended when she discovered her husband was married to another woman and had a family. Her second marriage lasted 31 years, and ended with her husband's death in 2000.


== Controversy ==
She was criticized by the LGBT community when she said in an interview, "It is better for orphans to die than to be adopted by a homosexual family." She then apologized to the LGBT community and did a special performance and a press conference in a gay club called Spartacus Disco.


== Discography ==


== References ==