Craig Finn (born August 22, 1971) is an American singer-songwriter and musician. He is best known as the frontman of the American indie rock band The Hold Steady, with whom he has recorded eight studio albums. Prior to forming The Hold Steady, Finn was the frontman of Lifter Puller. Described by Pitchfork as "a born storyteller who's chosen rock as his medium," Finn has released four solo albums, Clear Heart Full Eyes (2012), Faith in the Future (2015), We All Want the Same Things (2017) and his latest release I Need a New War  (2019).


== Personal life ==
Born in Boston, Massachusetts, Finn grew up in Edina, Minnesota. He was raised Catholic and still identifies as such. Finn attended Valley View Middle School, and subsequently graduated from Breck School, and in 1993, from Boston College. Before moving to New York City in 2000, Finn was working as a financial broker for American Express in Minnesota. Upon moving to New York City, where he currently resides, Finn got a job at a live music webcasting company called Digital Club Network. At this point in time, Finn did not play music for two years before forming The Hold Steady. Finn lives in Greenpoint, Brooklyn with his girlfriend, whom he has been dating since 2006.


== Musical career ==


=== With Lifter Puller ===
Back in Minneapolis, Finn was a member of the band Lifter Puller from 1994 to 2000. The band included Tad Kubler, who later joined Finn in The Hold Steady. The band released three albums, two compilation, an EP and a number of singles.  In 2009 the material was re-issued digitally supported by a book: Lifter Puller vs. the End Of. The re-releases included live material and the compilation Slip Backwards.


=== With The Brokerdealer ===
Craig Finn did a short stint of work with Mr. Projectile after moving to New York City in the fall of 2001. The result of this was two EP's.

Untitled EP 1If Not For Hipster Pictures
Give Me My Body Back
The Last Ones Up Become LoversUntitled EP 2Sophomore Slump
Mommy Can I Go Out and Chill Tonight
Do Me Nails
The Dead Ones Look Like Dolls


=== With The Hold Steady ===
He moved to New York City in the fall of 2001, after Lifter Puller broke up, for a change and because he and his wife knew people there. He has said that lyrically, with The Hold Steady, he's been trying to produce a more positive, coherent, story-based message, in a natural way that he could imagine someone saying.


=== Work with other artists ===
Craig Finn provided his voice to Titus Andronicus's second album, The Monitor.  He is the voice of Walt Whitman at the very end of their song "A Pot in Which to Piss"
.He worked with Minneapolis rapper P.O.S on the song "Safety In Speed (Heavy Metal)" which was released on the 2006 album Audition. Always close to the Twin Cities music scene, he also contributed to Minnesota musician Mark Mallman's song "You're Never Alone in New York" on the 2009 album Invincible Criminal.
In between Lifter Puller and The Hold Steady, he did a project with Mr. Projectile known as The Brokerdealer, a techno styled group. They released two unnamed EPs.
In 2010 he co-wrote, with Chris Cheney, the title track from The Living End's 2011 album, The Ending Is Just The Beginning Repeating, while Cheney was in New York City. After working together, Cheney called Finn "a hell of a lyricist".In 2011, Finn performs lead vocals for a Minnesota Twins tribute song "Don't Call Them Twinkies" on The Baseball Project's 2nd album "Volume 2:High and Inside".
In 2012, he sang backup on the title track for Joe Pug's album, The Great Despiser.
On April 8, 2014, Cheap Girls premiered the song "Man In Question" from their Famous Graves album. The track features Finn on guest vocals.On February 22, 2016, Craig released a split single with Titus Andronicus named "No Faith / No Future / No Problem".  On this split, Titus Andronicus covers Craig's "No Future" from his debut solo album, Clear Heart Full Eyes, and Craig Finn covers Titus Andronicus's "No Future" from their debut album, The Airing Of Grievances.


=== Solo ===
Finn's first solo album, recorded in Austin, Texas, entitled Clear Heart Full Eyes, was released January 24, 2012 through Vagrant Records.  A second solo album, Faith in the Future, was released in 2015. Following "Faith in the Future," Craig Finn released the Newmyer's Roof EP featuring the title track "Newmyer's Roof" and 6 songs that were not on "Faith in the Future." The EP was originally made available in June 2015 as a pre-order download via PledgeMusic, but was given a full release on March 4, 2016 via Partisan Records.In December, 2016, Finn released "Preludes", the first single from his next album, titled We All Want the Same Things, which was released via Partisan Records on March 24, 2017.
On January 30 2019, Partisan Records announced the April 26 release of Finn's fourth album, I Need A New War, and released the first song from the album, "Blankets".


== Lyrical style ==
Finn is most notable for his third-person narrative lyrical style, wherein he frequently makes reference to literature, pop culture, adolescence, partying, religion and drugs. Both with Lifter Puller and The Hold Steady, Finn's songs often follow a storytelling format that features recurring characters and locations, with Ybor City, Fla., and the Twin Cities having special prominence.
Particularly in later Hold Steady albums, Finn's songs have explored the darker aspects of his characters' party-centric lifestyles. Finn told an interviewer in 2012: "Artistically, I have always been really interested in the hangover; not just the celebration and the confetti but also the puke in the gutter." Finn has said that "irony is certainly not something I want to be accused of," instead hoping to bring "honesty and sincerity" through his songwriting. Although his stories involve violence and heavy drug use, Finn states his songwriting is not very personal or "confessional".Finn's lyrics have been a frequent point of praise for The Hold Steady with Uncut Magazine describing his style as "narratives driven less by the wordy exposition of yore than acute observation, devastating detail, by turns exclamatory, epigrammatic and grainily authentic."


== Influences ==
Finn has indicated that some of his greatest lyrical influences include Blake Schwarzenbach from Jets to Brazil and Jawbreaker as well as Bruce Springsteen. In a Guardian article, he described The Replacements' Let It Be as his "favorite ever record." He's also a big fan of Rick Danko of The Band. In an interview with GQ, Finn discussed his love for Danko: "People roll their eyes about his solo records, but I'm just happy to have more songs that I can listen to him sing; his voice is incredible...I would listen to him sing the phone book."He is also a fan of Drive-By Truckers.


== Discography ==
Clear Heart Full Eyes (2012)
Faith in the Future (2015)
We All Want the Same Things (2017)
I Need a New War (2019)


== References ==


== External links ==
The Hold Steady official website
lftrpllr.com official website
Archive of Lifter Puller's old website
"The Hold Steady Biography - ARTISTdirect Music". Artistdirect.com. Retrieved 2012-01-05.