Hal Crook (born 28 July 1950 in Providence, Rhode Island) is a jazz trombonist. He has a degree from the Berklee College of Music and is considered to be a leading teacher and author in the field of jazz improvisation.
Hal was a Professor at Berklee College of Music for 30 years, and has played on over 40 recordings.  Some of his notable students include Esperanza Spaulding, Leo Genovese, Antonio Sanchez, Lionel Loueke, and Chris Cheek.  Hal's composing and arranging credits include music for the NBC "Tonight Show" Band, WDR Radio Band (Cologne), Phil Woods, Clark Terry, Herb Pomeroy, Louis Bellson, Artie Shaw, Duke Belaire, Dick Johnson, Nick Brignola, the New England Emmy Awards, and the San Diego Pops.
"Following the course of Hal Crook's improvisations is a fascinating peek into an exceptional improvisational mind, not to mention an amazing trombonist. His playing is filled with technical marvels, but clearly not just for show. He works with modern techniques of building improvisations on various intervals, the development of motives, the use of pentatonic scales, and working in the outer reaches of harmony. His speed, range, fluency, sound and remarkable technique put him at the top echelon of players."  Jazz 'Bones (Kurt Dietrich, Author)
He is the author of seven textbooks on jazz improvisation, a novel (A Brief Madness), and a collection of short stories (Windborne Tales).
Though retired from Berklee, he continues to teach privately.


== Discography ==
Hello Heaven (1982)
Only Human (1993)
Quartet Narayani - with Joe Diorio (Ram 1994)
Hero Worship (1997)
Um: Stray Dog (2001)
Creatures of Habit with Leo Genovese, Take Toriyama, Thompson Kneeland
Narayani with Joe Diorio, Steve LaSpina, Steve Bagby
Conjunction with Jerry Bergonzi
Trio I with Dave Weigert, Yorai Oron
Trio II with Dave Weigert, Hans Glawischnig
Trio III with Dave Weigert, Hans Glawschnig
Hello Heaven  with Phil Woods, Bill Dobbins, Chuck Israels, Bill Goodwin
Creative Comping for Improvisation, Vol. I, II, III


== References ==


== External links ==
Hal Crook Website