Peter Frederick Way (7 August 1951 – 14 August 2020) was an English hard rock and heavy metal bassist. He was bassist for the English rock band UFO from 1968 to 1982; Way rejoined the band briefly in 1988–1989, and full-time from 1991 to 2008. He was also a founding member of Waysted and Fastway and notably played with Michael Schenker Group and Ozzy Osbourne.


== Career ==
Pete Way began his career as a studio musician for many artists. He played in bands with friends from high school and later created a band with friends Phil Mogg, Andy Parker and Mick Bolton. This became the original UFO lineup. After two studio albums with their original guitarist, the band then recruited the guitar wunderkind Michael Schenker from Scorpions. Later the band signed on guitarist/keyboardist and long-time friend Paul Raymond. Paul 'Tonka' Chapman replaced Schenker in the early 1980s. The group released many albums and singles and had two UK top 40 hits.Disliking the more commercially accessible direction UFO were taking in the early 1980s, Way jumped ship to form Fastway with former Motörhead guitarist "Fast" Eddie Clarke. Pete was unable to extricate himself from a contract he signed with Chrysalis and stepped down to play bass for Ozzy Osbourne during the Diary of a Madman tour.In 1982, Way formed the punningly titled Waysted with Fin Muir, Paul Raymond, Frank Noon and Ronnie Kayfield. Their debut album Vices was released in 1982 and reached #78 in the UK chart. The band's third album, Save your Prayers, was their most successful in America where it reached #185.After briefly rejoining the band during the 1988–1989 period, Way joined Phil Mogg in the reformed UFO in 1991 and recorded six more albums with the band within the next seventeen years: High Stakes & Dangerous Men (1992), Walk on Water (1995), Covenant (2000), Sharks (2002), You Are Here (2004) and The Monkey Puzzle (2006). Health issues forced him to leave the band once again in 2008.


=== Later ===
Way released two albums under the Damage Control banner, the first album Damage Control was recorded with Robin George, Spike and Chris Slade; the second was recorded as a trio with Robin and Pete sharing lead vocals.More recently in 2018 Pete formed the Pete Way Band  along with guitarist Kamil Woj ( in 2019 replaced by Tym Scopes),Jason Poole (Waysted), Clive Edwards (UFO) and  with Laurence Archer (UFO) guesting on some live shows when they toured the UK last year.
Pete also recorded a guest bass on a Warfare song along with Evo and Fast Eddie Clarke titled "Misanthropy", which will be released in 2021 on Cherry Red Records (this will be the very 1st time Eddie and Pete will have played together commercially)


== Guitars ==
During UFO's 1970s heyday, he used a Fender Precision bass, which along with his trademark striped trousers largely influenced the stage appearance of Steve Harris.Way switched to Gibson Thunderbird basses, which are renowned for the hard edged rock tone; however, he recently commented that he has been using an Epiphone Thunderbird as he found it seemed to have a fatter tone. He has also been known to use basses by Ibanez, most notably a pink Ibanez Iceman bass, and the Washburn B-20 for which he was pictured in an advertising campaign. His image was also used in an ad campaign by Artex basses.


== Publications ==
In 2017, he released his autobiography, with the aid of professional writer Paul Rees, called A Fast Ride Out of Here: Confessions of Rock's Most Dangerous Man.


== Death ==
Way died on August, 14th 2020, at the age of 69 one week after his birthday, following life-threatening injuries he had sustained in an accident two months earlier. He is survived by his wife Jenny, two daughters Zowie and Charlotte and younger brother Neill.Way died just ten weeks after his former UFO bandmate and guitarist Paul Chapman, and one year after keyboardist Paul Raymond, leaving vocalist Phil Mogg and drummer Andy Parker as the only surviving members of the No Place to Run lineup.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Pete Way Official site
Waysted Official site
UFO Official site
Metal-Rules.com - Heart of Steel: Interviews UFO's Vinnie Moore and Pete Way
Pete Way: "If I’d have put it off another day... it would have been too late"
Pete Way discography at Discogs