Paul D. Rosenberg (born August 1, 1971) is an American music manager, current CEO of Goliath Records and former President of Def Jam Recordings, best known for his association with hip hop artist Eminem. He is also known for his associations with The Knux, DJ AM, Action Bronson, and pop punk band Blink-182.


== Career ==
In addition to being a manager of several music acts, Rosenberg, along with Eminem, is also the co-founder of hip hop record label Shady Records, which was founded in 1999. Rosenberg first became involved with Eminem in 1997, during the recording of the Slim Shady EP, and has since been featured in a skit (titled "Paul" except on The Eminem Show, where it was called "Paul Rosenberg") on every album from The Slim Shady LP through Relapse, as well as Kamikaze, as a character concerned with the particular record, advising Eminem on steps to take and often ordering him to "tone down" the lyrics or scrap the album completely.  With Eminem, Rosenberg co-wrote every skit on the 2009 album Relapse.Rosenberg is affiliated with Deckstar and Lawrence Vavra, in addition with Steve Aoki and his label Dim Mak Records, working in the management area. Paul is a co-producer for Eminem's hip-hop radio station Shade 45, which is channel 45 on SiriusXM satellite radio. He became manager of New York City rapper Action Bronson in late 2012, getting him signed to Vice Records and then to his own management firm Goliath Artists.On March 23, 2013, Rosenberg added Detroit-based rapper Danny Brown to his management firm.In late 2015, Rosenberg also added enigmatic, anonymous rapper Spark Master Tape to his management Goliath Artists.In 2016, Rosenberg and Action Bronson along with Vice created the TV series Fuck, That's Delicious, for which Rosenberg acts as the executive producer.On August 1, 2017, he was appointed Chairman and CEO of Def Jam Recordings, succeeding the current CEO, Steve Bartels. The transition took place in 2018.On February 21, 2020, Rosenberg stepped down from his position as CEO of Def Jam and announced the formation of Goliath Records, a joint venture label with Universal Music Group.


== Personal life ==
Rosenberg is Jewish. He has been a resident of Alpine, New Jersey.


== References ==


== External links ==
Paul Rosenberg's official blog