Gregory Frank Raposo (born May 3, 1985) known professionally as Greg Raposo, is an American rock'n'roll singer and actor. Raposo initially came to fame in the early 2000s as a member of the boy band Dream Street, but has subsequently branched out into a solo career as a rock singer. His self-titled debut solo album Greg Raposo was released in 2003 and charted at #40 on the Independent Albums Chart in its opening week. His follow up 2012 release Loss Love Life was released independently.


== Life and career ==


=== 1985–1992: Early life ===
Gregory Frank Raposo was born in New York May 3, 1985 to Maryann and Octavio Raposo.
When Greg was two years old, he began to develop a fascination with the guitar. When he was six years old, Mrs. Raposo decided that she was tired of having to buy more toy guitars because he kept breaking them, so she bought him his first real guitar and arranged for him to take guitar lessons with a private teacher. He was soon after entered into a talent contest. He won, singing an Elvis Presley song. His aunt entered him on Star Search where he took second place and was referred to a talent agent.


=== 1993–1998: Career beginnings, "The Elvis Kid", and broadway ===
Raposo was cast in sixteen regional and national commercials for everything from Kit Kat bars to Crest toothpaste. Then at nine, he requested to be allowed to sing and play guitar on-air during a local live recording of a radio show on WPLJ. Deejay Scott Shannon agreed and Greg went on the air. Shannon thought that Greg was very talented and from that day on was crowned as "The Elvis Kid". Greg appeared on WPLJ for three years. "The Elvis Kid" performed everywhere, including with The Jordanaires and DJ Fontana who were Elvis' real backup band. Greg was the only child invited to perform at Graceland for the 20th anniversary of Elvis Presley's death (1997) by Priscilla Presley.
In 1996, Raposo auditioned for 'Broadway on Broadway', an extravaganza of Broadway performers. Greg got the honor of being the opener for the show and sang an original composition in front of fifty-thousand people. After opening for 'Broadway on Broadway', he was cast in an off-Broadway singing group called "The Broadway Kids", with whom he recorded two albums. During his time in The Broadway Kids Greg met Chris Trousdale. In 1998, both boys successfully auditioned for a group called "Boy Wonder". "Boy Wonder" was disbanded for lack of interest from sponsors. Raposo and Trousdale were later reunited for Dream Street.
Raposo was also involved with several charity and anti-substance abuse groups. This included: The Kids for Kids Project, Audrey Hepburn/Children's Fund, Young Plaza Ambassadors Club, Jerry's Kids, and Variety, the Children's Charity. Raposo claims that Kids for Kids was the most fulfilling thing he has ever participated in.


=== 1999–2002: Rise to fame and Dream Street ===

Originally named 'Boy Wonder' (a name borrowed from the nickname of comic book character Robin from the Batman comics and films), Dream Street was put together by music producers Louis Baldonieri and Brian Lukow. Raposo along with Trousdale were already a shoe-in for the Dream Street auditions since they were the original member of 'Boy Wonder'. After casting two-hundred boys, Jesse McCartney, Frankie J. Galasso, and Matt Ballinger joined the group.
Their eponymous debut album was released on July 10, 2001. It was certified Gold in the US by the RIAA peaking No. 1 on Billboard's Independent Albums chart and at No. 37 on the Billboard 200. The songs, "It Happens Every Time" and "I Say Yeah" were frequently played on Radio Disney. The boys soon made appearances to perform on various talk shows and television events including Maury and Ricki Lake.
While the rising success of Dream Street was growing, tensions between the music producers and the boys' parents also arise.  This led to a lawsuit that would force the members to disband. The final Dream Street release was the soundtrack album to the 2002 film The Biggest Fan, which starred Trousdale. Raposo has appeared as himself in the film as well.


=== 2002–2004: Solo career, Greg Raposo, and Radio Disney ===
He performed his first solo concert on October 13, 2002, at The Downtown in Farmingdale, New York. Tickets sold out in less than two hours and a second concert was issued for the same venue, which also sold out.  He subsequently performed at several radio station multi-artist shows, solo acts, and as an opening act for several bands.On May 3, 2003, Raposo's first solo single, "Take Me Back Home", premiered on Radio Disney as a part of their "Music Mailbag" segment.  It received positive ratings, and won a spot on the station's playlist with an 92% of the popular vote—setting records on RadioDisney. His second single, "Every Summer", premiered on the Radio Disney Music Mailbag on July 12, 2003, with 95% of the popular vote.
Raposo's eponymous debut album was released on September 2, 2003.  The album was in the top fifty on the Billboard Top Sales chart (#40) and was #67 on the Billboard Top HeatSeekers chart the week of its release.  The second single from the album, "Every Summer", debuted on the RadioDisney Top Thirty Countdown on September 14, 2003, at spot #22.  He debuted on the RadioDisney.com Top 3 with "Every Summer" on November 19, 2003, at the #3 spot.
In November 2003, Greg embarked on his first national tour as a headlining act, co-heading with Stevie Brock for the RadioDisney Jingle Jam Tour, with former Dream Street bandmate Jesse McCartney opening.  The tour hit nineteen cities across the United States and the average audience size was around 2000 people for each venue. Greg's first single, "Take Me Back Home", was officially added to the RadioDisney playlist on November 21, 2003. During 2004, Raposo would appear in a film Destination Fame.


=== 2005–2008: Rock band "Raposo" era ===
The band Raposo went through three incarnations; from the original line-up, RAPOSO to Stereopath then back to Raposo for a short period of time before rebranding as Dead Celebrities.


==== 2005–2006: Raposo ====
Through years of various band formations, Raposo finally found what he was looking for in lead guitarist Nick Slobodskoy. Nick was first a classically trained violinist, but that all changed when he was introduced to the music of Guns N' Roses and purchased his first guitar. Nick formed rock band Floffus and later joined local band Brookside, sharing the stage with such national acts as Thursday, Taking Back Sunday, The Starting Line, Wheatus and Superdrag. Drummer Lou Vecchio started playing drums from an extremely young age. This third-generation drummer cites his father, Louis Vecchio, among his many idols. Endorsed by MRP Drums, Lou is recognized as one of the best drummers on Long Island originally form the famous NY band Unlikely Heroes  . His tight rhythms and passionate playing brings a distinctive groove to the RAPOSO sound. Bassist Jakey Lee grew up on classic rock. He was in Brookside for several tours and played with Nick. He had also done some studio sessions with Lou, and their chemistry was already there. Matching Lou's tight rhythms brought Jake into the fold as the final member of RAPOSO.


==== 2007: Stereopath ====
The second incarnation of Raposo, Stereopath existed until guitarist Nick Slobodskoy left in February 2008. The band recorded an unreleased 6-song EP entitled "Stereopath".


==== 2008: Dead Celebrities ====
The third incarnation of Raposo began in May 2008. Its members are Greg, Jesse Leo, Brian Corona, Danny Miller, and Drummer Dan Leo. Jesse and Brian formerly led Long Island-based The Unlikely Heroes. Dan Leo was the drummer of bands Diffuser(Hollywood Records)and Action Action(Victory). The third incarnation of RAPOSO were semi-finalists in the MTV2 Battle of the Bands for a spot on the RockBand II Tour and finished the voting process ranked in the top two.  They changed their name to Dead Celebrities, recorded an album (which never released), and disbanded. During 2008, Raposo acted as Gary in the film Return to Sleepaway Camp.


=== 2012: Loss, Love, Life ===
After a three-year hiatus, Raposo returned to a solo career.  He released the independent album "Loss, Love, Life", in memoriam of his cousin Theresa Buccatello, on May 3, 2012, funded by a Kickstarter initiative.  The music video for his first independent single, "That Day", was produced in New York City and released online on May 15, 2012.  Reviews have praised "Loss, Love, Life" for being "genuine" and "not sounding like a slightly older boy band." In the summer of 2012, Raposo featured on the Rock Camp Tour around New York, New Jersey, and Long Island.


=== 2020: Chris Trousdale tribute ===
On June 2, 2020, Raposo's former Dream Street bandmate Chris Trousdale died at a hospital in Burbank, California, at the age of 34 due to complications from an unknown illness during the COVID-19 pandemic in California. It was later revealed that COVID-19 was the main complication of Trousdale's death. On June 11, 2020, on what would be Trousdale's 35th birthday, Raposo and his former Dream Street bandmates Jesse McCartney, Frankie Galasso, and Matt Ballinger reunited for a virtual performance of "It Happens Every Time" to pay tribute to Trousdale. This would be the first public appearance of Dream Street together as a group since the disbandment over the lawsuits prior.


== References ==