Kenneth Joseph Rankin (February 10, 1940 – June 7, 2009) was an American singer and songwriter from the Washington Heights neighborhood of New York City.  He worked in the folk rock and singer-songwriter genres, with jazz influences.  His voice was distinct and would often hit high notes to express emotion in his songs.


== Biography ==
Rankin was raised in New York and was introduced to music by his mother, who sang at home and for friends. Early in his career he worked as a singer-songwriter. Three of his albums entered the Billboard magazine Album Chart. He spent most of his career in pop music.
He was a guitarist on the album Bringing It All Back Home by Bob Dylan. He appeared on The Tonight Show more than twenty times. Host Johnny Carson wrote the liner notes to Rankin's 1967 debut album Mind Dusters, which included the single "Peaceful." Rankin recorded the song again for his album Like a Seed (1972), and Helen Reddy sang a cover version of it that reached No. 2 on the Adult Contemporary chart and No. 12 on the Pop chart. Georgie Fame had a hit with his version of the song in 1969. It was Rankin's only songwriting credit to make the British charts, reaching No. 16 and spending nine weeks on the chart.
When he worked with Alan Broadbent, Mike Wofford, and Bill Watrous, his music got closer to jazz. His songs were performed by Peggy Lee, Mel Tormé and Carmen McRae, while Stan Getz said of him that he was "a horn with a heartbeat". Reflecting his interest in Brazilian music, Rankin recorded the album  Here in My Heart in Rio de Janeiro with jazz musicians Michael Brecker and Ernie Watts. He returned to more contemporary songs after signing with Verve Records, including "A Song for You" by Leon Russell and "I've Just Seen a Face" by the Beatles. After recording the Beatles' song "Blackbird" for his album Silver Morning, he was asked by Paul McCartney to perform it when McCartney and John Lennon were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame.Rankin befriended comedian George Carlin; both were signed to Little David Records. Starting in 1972, Rankin was often the opening act or musical guest for Carlin's live performances. The two flew in Carlin's private jet. Although Rankin had overcome his drug habit at Phoenix House, he returned to cocaine while on tour with Carlin. Rankin and Carlin toured together intermittently for nearly ten years. Rankin sang at Carlin's memorial service in June 2008.
He was married to Yvonne Rodriguez-Calderone and survived by son Chris Rankin, daughters Chanda Rankin and Jena Rankin-Ray and a granddaughter.
Rankin died of lung cancer on June 7, 2009, three weeks after he was diagnosed with the illness.


== Discography ==
Mind-Dusters (Mercury, 1967)
Family (Mercury, 1969)
Like a Seed (Little David, 1972)
Silver Morning (Little David, 1974)
Inside (Little David, 1975)
The Kenny Rankin Album (Little David, 1977)
After the Roses (Atlantic, 1980)
Hiding in Myself (Cypress, 1988)
Because of You (Chesky, 1991)
Professional Dreamer (Private Music, 1995)
Here in My Heart (Private Music, 1997)
The Bottom Line Encore Collection (The Bottom Line, 1999)
A Christmas Album (Rankin Music, 1999)
Haven't We Met? (Image Entertainment, 2001)
A Song for You (Verve, 2002)


=== As guest ===
With Benny Carter

Benny Carter Songbook (MusicMasters, 1996)
Benny Carter Songbook Volume II (MusicMasters, 1997)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Kenny Rankin at IMDb
Kenny Rankin at the Internet Broadway Database
LA Times obituary
Kenny Rankin on album cover with his daughters
Early and past music covers