Jacky Wu (Chinese: 吳宗憲; born 26 September 1962) is a Taiwanese television show host, singer, and actor. He hosts numerous variety shows, such as the long running popular Taiwan (Republic of China) variety show Guess.


== Career ==
In 1987, Wu started out by taking cameo roles in variety shows. He is known for his quick witted humor and open-fire talks, which have attracted both followers and critics.
In 1998, Wu provided the voice of the dragon Mushu in the Mandarin dub of the Disney animated film Mulan.
Maureen Tcakik of Time Asia described him as the sole Taiwanese entertainer to become a "phenomenon" and "the most popular guy on local television."  In 2000, Channel V gave him the award "Favorite Chinese Person of the Year". In 2001, he had six variety talk shows in Taiwan.Jacky Wu currently ranks one of the most popular and richest entertainers in Taiwan. Known for his quick witted humor and open fire talks, Wu has for the most part been a showboat of river joy and sensationalism. His love life has also been a center of tabloids under the public eye. Contemplating whether to retire after he has earned more than enough money, Wu plans to spend more time with his family in the near future.
Jacky Wu discovered Jay Chou's music score at a singing competition and was impressed with its complexity. Wu hired him as a contract composer and paired him with the novice lyricist Vincent Fang. Jay Chou then rose up to become a superstar celebrity in the Chinese arena.
He currently ranks as one of the richest entertainers in Taiwan. He had received honorary (non-academic) bachelor's degree from his alma mater – National Taiwan University of Arts for services in the Taiwanese entertainment industry because he never completed his studies in Performance Arts.
Wu has been the host of a number of popular shows, including the long-running "Guess" which won him an honor in 2008's Golden Bell Awards.Wu has mentioned in an interview with mainland website Sina.com.cn that the deadline for his retirement is 30 June 2010. He had hinted at his intention to retire many times, after which he will cease working as an entertainer. "I want to lead an easier life," Wu told Sina. "I've been in the show business for so long, I just need a change now," said Wu, whose 27-year-long career has included his stint as a host, singer and actor. The star says he will focus on his new company which makes environmentally friendly LED lamps.
Wu has returned to television hosting along with several new shows including "Guess" with co-host Patty Hou since 12 March 2011. He also continued hosting other variety shows such as Power Sunday until 2012.
Jacky Wu has won the Golden Bell Award a total of 4 times throughout his career. His won his first Golden Bell Award in 2008 with Aya Liu for variety show Guess. He continued with a three year streak from 2016 to 2018 for best host in a variety or reality game show. In 2016, he won the best host award for Variety Show with his eldest daughter Sandy Wu for Super Followers, and in 2017 and 2018, he won with KID (Lin Bo-Sheng) for Mr. Player for Best Outdoor Reality Game Shows.


== Personal life ==
Jacky Wu’s father is Cantonese and mother Taiwanese. He secretly married Chang Wei-wei in a "simple ceremony" attended by their parents in 1990 and had three daughters, Sandy, Vivian and Olivia, and one son, Rick. He admitted to lying about his marital status and apologized publicly in a newspaper interview on 16 August 2000. Wu had no intention to conceal his marital status to protect his career in the show business, but rather to protect his children from possible harm. Wu and Chang had since registered their marriage in 2001.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Keliher, Macabe; Maureen Tkacik. "I Know What Young People Want". Time Asia. Archived from the original on 22 May 2001. Retrieved 15 November 2018. – Interview


== External links ==
Jacky Wu on Facebook