Jon Fishman (born February 19, 1965) is an American drummer known for his work with the band Phish, which he co-founded in 1983, and which was, in part, named after him. He is credited with co-writing nineteen Phish songs, eight with a solo credit.


== Early life ==
Fishman was born in Philadelphia and grew up in Syracuse, New York. Fishman had a passion for the drums from an early age and emulated John Bonham, the drummer for Led Zeppelin, Bill Bruford of Yes, and Keith Moon of The Who. He went to Jamesville-Dewitt High School in a suburb of Syracuse. After graduation in 1983, he attended the University of Vermont to study engineering. Shortly after his arrival, he met Mike Gordon and Trey Anastasio and founded the band Phish. Deciding against engineering, he and Anastasio transferred to Goddard College.


== Musical career ==


=== Phish ===
The band Phish was named after him (he is commonly referred to as "Fish" among many other nicknames) though other explanations for the name have been given. In addition to drumming, he also sings back-up vocals and occasionally lead-vocals (usually on cover songs, most of them humorous – the best examples are Prince's "Purple Rain", Syd Barrett’s "Love You", and "Terrapin", Neil Diamond's "Cracklin' Rosie", Will Smith's song "Gettin' Jiggy Wit It", and Syd Barrett-era Pink Floyd's "Bike").  Worthy of note are his more serious vocal efforts, including lead vocals on Phish's cover of the Talking Heads song "Crosseyed and Painless," and his vocal duties on the Phish originals, "The Moma Dance," "Taste," and "Ghost."  He is well known on tour for his Electrolux vacuum cleaner solos and playing while wearing a donut-printed muumuu dress. He has admitted to taking acid before playing early in the band's career.


== Equipment ==
Fishman uses a variety of drums and cymbals on his kit; brands such as Noble & Cooley, Gretsch, Ludwig, Yamaha, Ayotte, Eames, Zildjian, Sabian, Paiste, and Wuhan. He also uses Remo drum heads, Vic Firth drum sticks, and LP percussion accessories. 
His setup consists of:

22x14 Gretsch round badge bass drum (1958–63) re-wrapped by Precision Drum Company.
6x6 Noble & Cooley tom (in Black Finish)
8x7 Noble & Cooley tom
10x7 Noble & Cooley tom
12x8 Noble & Cooley tom
14x12 Noble & Cooley Floor Tom
16x14 Noble & Cooley Floor Tom
14x6.5 Ayotte 18-Ply Maple Snare (or 14x6.5 Precision 21-Ply Maple Snare w/ custom 3D phish logo).Cymbals include:

14" hi-hats (Zildjian A New Beat top, Paiste Formula 602 bottom)
13" Paiste Mega Cup Chime
15" Istanbul Agop Medium Thin Crash
18" Sabian HHX Evolution Crash
6" Rancan Ice Bell
8" Zildjian A Custom Splash
16" Sabian HHX Evolution Crash
21" Sabian AA Dry Ride
20" Zildjian A Custom Flat Ride w/ rivets
18" Wuhan China
22" Zildjian PangHe uses an LP Black Beauty cowbell, an LP Rock Ridge Rider cowbell, and a set of 4 LP temple blocks.
He uses Vic Firth drum sticks. His preferred "perfect pair" is the Peter Erskine Ride Stick and the American Classic 55A. He uses TG12 Sticks for practice, Vic Firth and Regal Tip Brushes, and Vic Firth T1 Mallets.
He uses Remo drum heads. His preferred setup:

Snare: Coated Ambassador; Bottom: Clear Diplomat
Toms: Clear Emperors; Bottoms: Clear Emperors
Kick: Coated Powerstroke 3; Bottoms: Ebony AmbassadorFish's Vacuum-A baby blue Electrolux vacuum cleaner (a.k.a. the vac or 'lux) has been in the repertoire (played as an instrument by Fishman) since circa 1989. An earlier, 1967 model was donated to the Hard Rock Cafe 1/29/93. The currently in-use model is from circa 1965.
On rare occasions, Fish will play the theremin.


== Other musical projects ==
Fishman was a past member of the Vermont band "Touchpants" and no longer participates. He also used to play drums in the rock band Pork Tornado, and performed with the Jazz Mandolin Project for several years. He has been a member of two large musical collectives, The Everyone Orchestra and The Village.  In 2007, he emerged from semi-retirement to perform a series of shows with the Yonder Mountain String Band, including a large portion of their set at the Rothbury Music Festival which happened the summer of 2008.
The Mimi Fishman Foundation is a nonprofit organization started by Jon to raise money for various charities, especially for charities that benefit the visually impaired.  The charity was named for Jon's mother, Mimi, who was diagnosed with glaucoma. Fishman was also announced as a member of fellow Phish member Trey Anastasio's new side-project Ghosts of the Forest.


== Personal life ==
Fishman and his five children Ella Cynthia, Jack Bradley, Rosie (Rose) Lorelei, Lily Millay, Fredrick (Freddie) George live in Lincolnville, Maine. The family appeared on an episode of the DIY Network home restoration series Maine Cabin Masters in March 2018. He is an avid fan of the deathgrind band Cattle Decapitation and guested on their 2019 album, Death Atlas.


=== Radio ===
He has hosted a radio show on WBFY-LP, a community radio station in Belfast, Maine, since 2017. The show was originally called the Jonny B. Fishman Radio Show, but has since changed its name to The Errant Path. Fishman hosts the show weekly on Thursday evenings when Phish is not on tour.


=== Politics ===
Fishman was inspired by former Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic to take action in his local elections. Fishman publicly endorsed Senator Bernie Sanders in both the 2016 and 2020 democratic primaries. Fishman cites Sanders leadership in Burlington and dedication to upholding the arts as primary factors for his support. In 2017, he was voted a selectman of Lincolnville, Maine.


== References ==