Floor Jansen (pronounced [ˈfloːr ˈjɑnsə(n)]; born 21 February 1981) is a Dutch singer, songwriter, and vocal coach. She is the lead vocalist of Finnish symphonic metal band Nightwish.
Jansen first became known as a member of symphonic metal band After Forever, standing as their lead vocalist from 1997, when she joined at age 16, to their disbanding in 2009. When After Forever disbanded, she formed ReVamp and has released two albums with them. In 2012 following the departure of their lead vocalist Anette Olzon, Nightwish brought in Jansen as a touring member until the end of their Imaginaerum World Tour. In 2013, they announced Jansen was now their full-time lead vocalist; she subsequently disbanded ReVamp to focus on Nightwish. In 2018, she and Pagan's Mind guitarist Jørn Viggo Lofstad premiered their hard rock duo Northward.
A frequent collaborator of Arjen Anthony Lucassen, Jansen is a member of his progressive metal supergroup Star One, and sang in the Ayreon albums Universal Migrator Part 1: The Dream Sequencer, 01011001, and The Source, as well as the live album Ayreon Universe – The Best of Ayreon Live. She also sang lead vocals in several songs of the MaYan album Quarterpast and in Avalon's Angels of the Apocalypse. She is the older sister of fellow singer Irene Jansen, who also worked with Ayreon.


== Biography ==


=== After Forever (1997–2009) ===
Jansen was sixteen when she joined Apocalypse (later known as After Forever) in 1997. Three years later the band released its first album, Prison of Desire. She co-wrote the band's words and music with Mark Jansen (no relation) until he left in 2002, after which she was the band's sole composer. Before becoming a full-time musician, she worked as a singing teacher.

Because of the burnout that After Forever bandmate Sander Gommans underwent, the band took a year off starting in January 2008 but ultimately decided to call it quits in February 2009. Jansen posted on her website that she was writing music with Jørn Viggo Lofstad (Pagan's Mind, Jørn Lande) for a new musical project, but the two did not publish as Northward until ten years later.


=== ReVamp (2009–2016) ===
On 17 October 2009, Jansen announced via MySpace that the name of her new band was ReVamp. ReVamp's first album was produced with After Forever keyboardist Joost van den Broek, bass player Jaap Melman (formerly of Dreadlock Pussy) and guitarist Waldemar Sorychta (Grip Inc., Voodoocult, Eyes of Eden and Despair) as songwriters and producers. The final line-up of ReVamp featured keyboardist Ruben Wijga, bass player Jaap Melman, guitarists Jord Otto and Arjan Rijnen and drummer Matthias Landes.

In August 2011, Van Canto announced on Facebook, that ReVamp would no longer participate in their Out of the Dark tour, as Jansen suffered a burnout herself.In late 2011, Jansen joined her former bandmate Mark Jansen in his band Mayan's Latin American tour, performing in São Paulo. In 2012, Jansen joined Adrenaline Mob on stage in Bochum and Weert. ReVamp's second album, Wild Card, was released in 2013.ReVamp announced its breakup in September 2016, citing Floor Jansen's inability to participate fully in both ReVamp and Nightwish.


=== Nightwish (2012–present) ===
After Nightwish's previous lead vocalist Anette Olzon parted ways with the band, Jansen acted as Nightwish's live lead vocalist for the remainder of the Imaginaerum World Tour in 2012. Her first show with the band was in Seattle in October. When commenting on the experience, she said:
There was this evil voice in my head that said, 'What on earth do you think you're doing? You don't know these songs, you've had no time to learn them'. And everybody in the venue was holding a cell phone, so it would be on YouTube straight away.
On 9 October 2013, Nightwish announced Jansen as Olzon's permanent replacement in the band. In 2015, Nightwish released their first studio album featuring Jansen as the lead vocalist, Endless Forms Most Beautiful. Out of this tour came the live album Vehicle of Spirit which is the second live album to feature Floor.
The second studio album with Jansen as lead vocalist, Human. :II: Nature., was released on 10 April 2020.


=== Solo career (2020–present) ===
Jansen performed her first solo concert in July 2021. On 2 August 2021, Jansen had confirmed in an interview that she is working on a solo album.


=== Other works ===
Three albums by the Dutch composer and multi-instrumentalist Arjen Anthony Lucassen's project Ayreon include guest vocals from Jansen: she sang backing vocals on "My House on Mars" from the album Universal Migrator Part 1: The Dream Sequencer, played the character of Forever, referred to as Ω, (Coincidentally, Jansen used the Ω symbol as an emblem for her band Revamp, and she has the symbol tattooed on her wrist) on seven songs from the album 01011001, and was featured as a character named The Biologist on the album The Source. She is also a member of Lucassen's heavy metal supergroup Star One, and was featured on the studio albums Space Metal and Victims of the Modern Age. She was also featured in the 2018 live album Ayreon Universe – The Best of Ayreon Live.
On 9 December 2013, she was also announced as the main vocalist, playing the lead role, for the second full-length album of former Stratovarius guitarist Timo Tolkki's metal opera act Avalon. The album, Angels of the Apocalypse, was released on 16 May 2014. She has also been a guest for the metal band Nightmare.
On 22 February 2018, Northward, a hard rock project by Jansen and Pagan's Mind guitarist Jørn Viggo Lofstad, was unveiled. The two created the project in 2007, writing an entire album worth of music in 2008 but being unable to record previously due to their busy schedules; they ultimately reunited in 2017 to finally record the album, which was released on 19 October 2018 under their signed label Nuclear Blast. The album features a duet between Jansen and her sister Irene.In 2019, Jansen participated in the Dutch TV-show Beste Zangers ("Best Singers"). During all episodes she impressed her fellow singers, but also the TV-audience with her voice. In the last episode she partnered with classical singer Henk Poort to perform Phantom of the Opera. The single of that performance reached the number one position in Dutch charts. That performance generated so much attention that she decided to plan a solo tour in the Netherlands. All venues were sold out.
She also won the "Popprijs 2019" - a prestigious Dutch award for the artist or band with an important contribution to Dutch pop music in the past year. Among her other performances for "Best Singers" was a solo version of Lady Gaga's Shallow and a separate acoustic duet version of the same song with Tim Akkerman.


== Personal life ==
As a child, she wanted to be a biologist; coincidentally, she played the character "The Biologist" in the Ayreon album The Source.Between 2014 and 2015, Jansen lived in Joensuu, the capital of North Karelia.Jansen has previously been in a relationship with After Forever guitarist Sander Gommans.On 18 September 2016, it was announced, that Jansen and her husband Hannes Van Dahl, the drummer of Sabaton, were expecting their first child. On 15 March 2017, Jansen announced via Instagram that she had given birth to a girl.Jansen is vegetarian.In 2018, a new species of beetle was discovered by scientist Andreas Weigel. It was named after Jansen, dubbing it Tmesisternus floorjanseni. This makes Floor Jansen the second Nightwish member to be a namesake for a newly discovered species, as a new kind of fungus gnat was discovered back in 2017 by Finnish biologist Jukka Salmela, who named the species after Tuomas Holopainen. Jansen herself announced the news on Facebook.


== Singing style ==
Jansen can sing from classical to belting and raspy vocals like screaming and death growls. She is a soprano with a range of more than three octaves (C3 to F6).Jansen started studying music at the Dutch Rock Academy in 1999, entering the Conservatorium Tilburg three years later. She studied musical theatre and a year of opera. When After Forever split up, she started teaching performing in her own course called Wanna be a Star?!
She used to play the guitar, piano and flute and has completed several years of music studies.


== Discography ==


=== Guest appearances ===
Ayreon – Universal Migrator Part 1: The Dream Sequencer (2000) – "My House on Mars"
Nightmare – The Dominion Gate (2005) – "A Taste of Armageddon" and "The Dominion Gate"
Ayreon: 01011001 (2008) – "Age of Shadows (We Are Forever)", "Liquid Eternity", "Beneath the Waves", "Newborn Race", "Ride the Comet", "The Fifth Extinction" and "The Sixth Extinction"
Ayreon: Elected (EP, 2008) – "Ride the Comet"
Devin Townsend Project – Deconstruction (2011) – "Pandemic"
MaYan – Quarterpast (2011) – "Drown the Demon", "Course of Life", "Bite the Bullet", "Sinner's Last Retreat" and "Symphony of Aggression"
MaYan – Antagonise (2014) – "Burn Your Witches" and "Redemption"
Epica – Retrospect (2013) – "Stabat Mater Dolorosa" and "Sancta Terra"
Avalon – Angels of the Apocalypse (2014) – "Design the Century", "The Paradise Lost", "You'll Bleed Forever" and "Angels of the Apocalypse"
U Meet – No Just (2014) – "Cognitive Bias"
Countermove – The Power of Love (2014) Charity single for the Red Cross, originally by Frankie Goes to Hollywood
Evergrey – The Storm Within (2016) – "In Orbit" and "Disconnect"
Ayreon – The Source (2017) – "The Day That the World Breaks Down", "Everybody Dies", "Star of Sirrah", "All That Was", "Run! Apocalypse! Run!", "Condemned to Live", "Aquatic Race", "The Dream Dissolves", "Deathcry of a Race", "Planet Y Is Alive!" and "The Human Compulsion"
Sabaton – The Last Stand (2017) – choir
Tarja Turunen – Feliz Navidad (2017) – charity version to help raise funds for Barbuda for Hurricane Irma relief, originally by José Feliciano
Ayreon – Ayreon Universe – The Best of Ayreon Live (2018) – "Merlin's Will", "Valley of the Queens", "Star of Sirrah", "Age of Shadows", "Everybody Dies" and "The Eye of Ra"
Metal Allegiance – Volume II: Power Drunk Majesty (2018) – "Power Drunk Majesty"
Sabaton – The Great War (2019) – "The Future of Warfare" (Soundtrack Edition)
Sabaton – "Christmas Truce" (Official Music Video) - Vocals during end credits


== Filmography ==
Soaring Highs and Brutal Lows: The Voices of Women in Metal


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===
Isoaho, Timo (2018). Nightwish – We Were Here (English ed.). Latvia: Deggael Communications. ISBN 978-952-99749-3-1.


== External links ==
Personal website
Nightwish website
Interview with Jansen (August 2007) at metal-ways.com
Ragnarok Radio Interview with Jansen and Lori Linstruth (December 2008)