Lari Michele White Cannon (; May 13, 1965 – January 23, 2018) was an American country music singer-songwriter and actress. She gained national attention in 1988 as a winner on You Can Be a Star, a talent competition on The Nashville Network. A recording contract with RCA Records Nashville followed a year later, producing three studio albums, a greatest hits package, and several chart singles, with three of her singles reaching Top Ten: "That's My Baby" and "That's How You Know (When You're in Love)" at No. 10, and "Now I Know" at No. 5. A fourth studio album was released in 1998 on Lyric Street Records, followed by two more releases on her label, Skinny White Girl.
Overall, White charted twelve times on the Billboard country music charts. White was also married to Nashville-based songwriter Chuck Cannon until her death from peritoneal cancer in 2018.


== Biography ==
White was born May 13, 1965, in Dunedin, Florida. As a child, she sang in her family's gospel group, The White Family Singers, with her parents, sister, and brother. White sang at talent contests, and performed in a local rock band called White Sound. She studied vocals and music engineering at the University of Miami's Frost School of Music. During her college years, she composed and performed in local clubs. She was a classmate of The Mavericks' Paul Deakin.


=== Musical career ===
White made her first national appearance in 1988 on the talent show You Can Be a Star on The Nashville Network (now known as Paramount Network); she won first prize, including a recording contract with Capitol Records. Although her debut single "Flying Above the Rain" received airplay in the Southern United States, it failed to chart, and White was dropped from Capitol's roster without releasing anything else.She joined a publishing house owned by Ronnie Milsap, taking acting lessons and performing at local dinner theaters. After attending an ASCAP showcase in 1991, she was invited by Rodney Crowell to sing in his backing band. 1992, White signed with RCA Records, releasing her debut album Lead Me Not a year later. The album, produced by Crowell, included three singles: "What a Woman Wants", the title track, and "Lay Around and Love on You". All three of these singles entered the Billboard country charts, and although none reached Top 40, the album peaked at No. 36 on the Top Heatseekers charts.
White's break-through album, Wishes, followed one year later. This was her most commercially-successful album, producing three consecutive Top Ten country hits in "That's My Baby", "Now I Know", and "That's How You Know (When You're In Love)", which respectively reached No. 10, No. 5, and No. 10. The album was a No. 1 album on Top Heatseekers and No. 24 on Top Country Albums, and was certified gold by the RIAA for U.S. shipments of 500,000 copies.Don't Fence Me In was the title of White's third RCA release, with the title track a cover of the Cole Porter-written song made famous by The Andrews Sisters. Its lead-off single was "Ready, Willing and Able", previously recorded by Daron Norwood in 1995 as the title track to his second album. White's rendition of the song was a Top 20 hit in 1996, although the only other single from the album did not reach Top 40. 1997, White also sang duet vocals on Travis Tritt's single "Helping Me Get Over You", a release from his album The Restless Kind, peaking at No. 18 on the Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart. 1997 also saw White's final release for RCA, a greatest hits package called The Best of Lari White reprising all her singles to that point including the Tritt duet, as well as two newly-recorded tracks, and the non-single "Itty Bitty Single Solitary Piece 'o My Heart", from her debut album.
White's third recording contract came in 1998; she signed to Lyric Street Records. Her first release for the label was the single "Stepping Stone", title track to her fourth studio album. This song became a Top 20 country hit, and her only entry on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at No. 73. Following it were "Take Me" at No. 32, and "John Wayne Walking Away" at No. 64.
Also included on this album were two songs later becoming singles for other artists: "Only God (Could Stop Me Loving You)", recorded as a duet with Toby Keith, an earlier cut on Billy Ray Cyrus's 1994 album Storm in the Heartland and would later become a minor hit in 2003 for the Canadian band Emerson Drive, while "Flies on the Butter" was also a minor hit in 2004 for Wynonna Judd, recording it as a duet with mother Naomi on her 2003 album What the World Needs Now Is Love.


=== Later career ===
White appeared in the first and final scenes of the 2000 film Cast Away as Bettina, a welder of metal angel wings who sent a package through FedEx which the main character, played by Tom Hanks, carried while stranded on an island. After the film, she placed her musical career on hiatus. She returned in 2004 with the self-released album Green Eyed Soul. She also co-produced four tracks on Billy Dean's 2004 album Let Them Be Little, and the entirety of Toby Keith's 2005 album White Trash with Money. White also co-wrote Sarah Buxton's late-2008 single "Space".
2006, White was an original cast member of the Broadway musical Ring of Fire. That year, she made music history as the first female producer of a male super-star's album with the release of Toby Keith's White Trash with Money. The album was certified platinum by the RIAA.2007, she debuted a cabaret production called My First Affair.
2010, Danny Gokey released the White-penned track "I Will Not Say Goodbye" as a single. White, composing the song with her husband Chuck Cannon and Vicky McGehee, was inspired by the untimely death of a friend's son.2014, a group of twenty-four authors and songwriters assembled a collection of stories in a book entitled The Shoe Burnin': Stories of Southern Soul. Included alongside the hardback publication is an audio CD including eighteen original works by the songwriters featured in the book. White is a featured storyteller in The Shoe Burnin' as well as the producer of the audio component of the project.


== Illness and death ==
In September 2017, White was diagnosed with cancer. Exploratory surgery in October 2017 revealed advanced peritoneal cancer. She died in Nashville, Tennessee, on January 23, 2018, at the age of 52. She is survived by her husband, songwriter Chuck Cannon, and three children.


== Discography ==


=== Albums and EPs ===


=== Singles ===
Notes


=== Guest singles ===


=== Music videos ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Lari White discography at Discogs 
Lari White at IMDb