Li Yundi (simplified Chinese: 李云迪; traditional Chinese: 李雲迪; pinyin: Lǐ Yúndí; born 7 October 1982) is a Chinese concert pianist popularly known as Yundi and formerly Yundi Li. Li is most well known for being the youngest pianist, at the age of 18, to win the 2000 XIV International Chopin Piano Competition.  He later served as the youngest juror in history for the competition in 2015.


== Early life ==
Yundi was born in Chongqing, China. Both his father, Li Chuan, and his mother, Zhang Xiaolu, worked for the Chongqing Iron and Steel Company.  Despite coming from a family without professional musicians, Li began having formal music education at a very young age. At age three, he was so enchanted by an accordion performance at a local shopping mall that he refused to leave. His parents then bought him an accordion. Studying with Tan Jianmin, a local music teacher, Yundi mastered the instrument so quickly that he won the top prize at the Chongqing Children's Accordion Competition in March 1987. Li began studying piano at the age of seven. Two years later, his teacher introduced him to Dan Zhaoyi, one of China's most renowned piano teachers, with whom he would study for nine years. Li's ambition was to become a professional pianist. In 1994, when Mr Dan accepted a job offer from Shenzhen Arts School (Shenzhen, China), Yundi followed him there to continue his study with him until his triumph at the 2000 International Chopin Piano Competition. Yundi later studied at the Hochschule für Musik, Theater und Medien Hannover in Hannover, Germany, from 2001 to 2006.


== Awards ==
Yundi has received top awards at various competitions. He won the Children's Piano Competition in Beijing in 1994. In 1995, he was awarded first place at the Stravinsky International Youth Competition. In 1996, he won the Third Class Award in the 10th Hong Kong - Asia Piano Open Competition, the most competitive competition in Asia for international pianists. In 1998, he won the 1998 Missouri Southern International Piano Competition (Junior Division). The next year, he took Third Prize at the International Franz Liszt Piano Competition of Utrecht, as well as being a major winner in the China International Piano Competition. He also won first place at the Gina Bachauer Young Artists International Piano Competition. In October 2000, urged by the Ministry of Culture of the People's Republic of China, Yundi participated in the XIV International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw. Yundi was the first competitor to be awarded the First Prize (the Gold Medal) in 15 years since Stanislav Bunin won it in 1985. The First Prize is only granted to the competitor whose performance has met the jury’s expectations.  At 18 years of age, he was the youngest and the first Chinese winner in the competition's history. Yundi was also given the "Polonaise award" by the Chopin Society for his performance of a polonaise.In September 2001, Yundi sought out pianist Arie Vardi as his mentor, and therefore left his parents' house to study in Hannover, Germany.In May 2010, in recognition of his contribution to Polish culture, the Polish Minister of Culture and National Heritage presented Yundi with a silver Medal for Merit to Culture - Gloria Artis.In October 2019, Yundi was awarded a gold Medal for Merit to Culture - Gloria Artis by the Polish government. 


== Career ==
Li's debut in the United States took place in June 2003 at Carnegie Hall, as part of Steinway and Sons' 150th Anniversary Gala. His United States concert debut took place the next month, when he performed Chopin's Piano Concerto No. 1. He was also honoured at a special reception at the home of the Chinese Ambassador to the United States, where he performed for various officials of the US State Department.Li's second recording of Liszt for Deutsche Grammophon, for whom he exclusively recorded until November 2008, was released in August 2003 and was named "Best CD of the Year" by The New York Times. His third recording, comprising Chopin's four Scherzi and three Impromptus, was released in late 2004.  Deutsche Grammophon released his recording of Beethoven sonatas in late 2012.  He has also given a recital in the renowned Musikverein in Vienna, performing works by Mozart, Scarlatti, Schumann, and Liszt.
Li obtained Hong Kong residency in November 2006, among the first batch of successful applicants under the Quality Migrant Admission SchemeLi is the subject of a 2008 feature-length documentary, The Young Romantic: Yundi Li, directed by Barbara Willis Sweete. This documentary captures Li as he works with the conductor Seiji Ozawa to prepare for his debut with the Berlin Philharmonic. He appeared as a Pennington Great Performers series artist with the Baton Rouge Symphony Orchestra, also in 2008.
In January 2010, Li signed an exclusive recording contract with EMI Classics with plans to record the complete works for solo piano by Frédéric Chopin.Li performed a solo recital at the Royal Festival Hall in London on March 16, 2010. He played a repertoire of Chopin pieces to a sold-out audience.In May 2012, Li officially signed with Universal Music Group and cooperated with Deutsche Grammophon once again. He then released recordings of Beethoven Piano Sonatas, Beethoven Emperor Concerto and Schumann Fantasie, The Art of Yundi, Chopin Prelude, and Chopin Ballades, Berceuse and Mazurkas.In July 2015 and as featured guest soloist, Li embarked on a nine-concert tour with the National Youth Orchestra of the United States led by celebrated conductor Charles Dutoit. Comprising mainly the orchestra’s debut performances in Asia, the tour started at Purchase College’s Performing Arts Center and ended in Hong Kong. Carnegie Hall was the second stop. The other six concerts were given in Mainland China.In May 2017, Li attended the opening ceremony of the Yundi Art Museum, located in the Chongqing Huangjueping Piano Museum. It displays several pianos from different stages of Li's career, including his first piano, as well as a collection of his awards, albums and photographs, and a high-tech experience pavilion.From August 29 to September 5 in 2017, Li led the Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra on a five-city concert tour in China, performing Chopin Concertos Nos. 1&2 as both the pianist and the conductor. It was Li's first time to pick up the baton. This tour was the first of a series of events celebrating the 100th anniversary of Poland's regained independence. In November 2017, Li gave a tour playing Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 23 in A major, K 488 with Staatskapelle Dresden in Germany and China. On November 3rd,  Li performed at a live concert at Beijing National Aquatics Center celebrating the 2017 League of Legends World Championship.In December 2019, Li signed with Warner Classics. He soon released a new album under Warner Classics label, Chopin’s Piano Concertos Nos. 1 and 2, in January 2020. He not only played the piano but also conducted the orchestra from the piano bench in this recording. In 2021, he joined the cast of Call Me By Fire as a contestant. He was subsequently eliminated in episode 7, then returned in episode 10, only to be withdrawn after episode 11 in light of recent controversies.


== Controversy ==
On 30 October 2015, Li performed Chopin's Piano Concerto No. 1 in Seoul, Korea. Li made many mistakes during the performance of the concerto, and the orchestra had to stop playing for approximately 10 seconds. Li later did not perform encore and cancelled his post-performance autograph session. Li's performance received overwhelming criticism from the audience. Li later provided an apology through his Weibo account for the mistakes he made, and thanked the orchestra and conductor.On 21 October 2021, after a tip-off by public informants referred to as the Chaoyang masses, Li was detained by Beijing police for allegedly hiring a prostitute. Under Chinese law, Li can be detained for up to 15 days and fined up to 5000 yuan ($782) for illegally soliciting a sex worker. The Chinese Musicians' Association subsequently declared that it would revoke Li's membership. Jerome A. Cohen, a New York University law professor specializing in the Chinese law, called the "lack of transparency" about his case "concerning", noting that prostitution is a "time-honored Communist Party claim against political opponents". According to The Guardian, there has thus far been no evidence that indicates the detention is politically motivated.


== Recordings ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Yundi Li at Deutsche Grammophon