Marcus Brosch is a German songwriter, record producer and remixer.
Lacking success at playing football in the early eighties, he stopped playing it in favour of playing the guitar at the age of thirteen years, playing in several bands with his later partner in productions, Henrik Menzel. In the mid-90s, he founded the Hip-Hop group Aroma with Menzel and Philipp Grüthering which was the predecessor of the progressive group Deichkind. However, Brosch and Menzel decided against a career as active artists and founded the production-groupd Island Bros.. One of their first notable projects was the single Electrosonic which they released under the pseudonym Amp at Universal Music together with Klaus Schulze in 1997. The success of their single provided them the opportunity to work at Herbert Böhme's Boogiepark Studios. Together with Andreas "Boogieman" Herbig, they produced remixes for renowned artists like Brandy, Joy Denalane, Lionel Richie, Enrique Iglesias, Liberty X, Inessa, Phil Collins or Lil' Kim. Subsequently, Boogieman and Island Bros. merged into Boogie Bros., however Menzel and Brosch still produced artists like Olesoul on their own.Beginning with 2002, Brosch went new ways, now mainly producing together with Roland Spremberg and Kim Sanders. Well-known results of their collaboration are songs like Fiesta by Vanessa S. feat. Ferris MC, a remix of a Deichkind-song as well as several other songs and remixes for German artists like Hartmut Engler, Florence Joy and BAP. Moreover, Brosch wrote songs for and produced the German singer Ben.Even though he worked with well-known artists, he always had an eye on promising newcomers, thus he promoted the Russian-born R&B- and pop-singer Inessa and the band Manga which eventually became Revolverheld.One of his recent works can be heard on Monrose's album Temptation for which he composed and arranged strings on Love Don't Come Easy, co-produced and mixed Work It and produced, recorded and provided instrumentation for I'm Gonna Freak Ya.In 2011 Marcus Brosch has produced the Album "Hardcore On Videotape" for and with Dante Thomas. The first Single "Damage Is Done" will be released on 07/29/2011 on the Label Depro Music and is distributed by Warner Music


== References ==

Marcus Brosch has product oceana


== External links ==
Official Page (in German)
Marcus Brosch discography at MusicBrainz
Marcus Brosch discography at Discogs